CHAPTER 21
Righteous Aroma discovers how to rebuke her
master by saying nothing
And artful Patience is able to rescue hers by being
somewhat less than truthful

As Shi Xiang-yun, fearful that Dai-yu would pursue her, turned and fled, Bao-yu
shouted after her: ‘She’s tripped: you needn’t worry! She’ll never catch up with you
now!’
And when Dai-yu reached the doorway where he was standing, he spread his arms
across it to stop her getting by and laughingly begged an amnesty for Xiang-yun.
‘Never!’ said Dai-yu, endeavouring to tug one of his hands away from the
door-jamb. ‘I’ll get that Yun if it’s the last thing I do!’
With Bao-yu blocking the doorway and Dai-yu evidently unable to get past him,
Xiang-yun deemed it safe to stop running, and turned to plead with her pursuer:
‘Pleathe cousin, just this once — spare me!’
Just then Bao-chai appeared from behind her shoulder — the smiling peacemaker:
‘I advise you two to make it up, for Cousin Bao’s sake.’
‘I won’t!’ said Dai-yu. ‘You’re all in league against me. You have all come here to
make fun of me.’
‘Oh, really!’ said Bao-yu. ‘Who would ever have the nerve to make fun of you? Yun
only said what she said because you mimicked her in the first place. She’d never have
dared to otherwise.’
It is hard to say how long the four of them might have remained there in this impasse
had not a servant arrived at that moment and summoned them to dinner in
Grandmother Jia’s room. It was already lighting-up time and Lady Wang, Li Wan,
Xi-feng, Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun had also forgathered for the meal. When
dinner was over, the company conversed for a while and then retired to their various
rooms for the night—Xiang-yun to sleep with Dai-yu in what had once, in the days
when she lived with Grandmother Jia, been her own bedroom. Bao-yu saw the two
of them back to their room and stayed there talking until well after ten, in spite of
frequent summonses by Aroma.
As soon as it was light next morning, Bao-yu was off again to the girls’ room, shuffling
along in his slippers and with a gown thrown loosely round his shoulders. The maids
Night?ingale and Kingfisher were not yet about, and their two young mistresses still
lay fast asleep under the covers. Dai-yu was tightly cocooned in a quilt of
apricot-coloured damask, the picture of tranquil repose Xiang-yun, by contrast, lay
with her hank of jet-black hair tumbled untidily beside the pillow, a white arm with
its two gold bracelets thrown carelessly out?side the bedding and two white
shoulders exposed above the peach-pink coverlet, which barely reached her armpits.
‘A tomboy, even in her sleep!’ Bao-yu muttered ruefully as he gently drew the
bedding up to cover her. ‘She’ll get a draught on those shoulders, and next thing
she’ll be complain?ing of a stiff neck!’
Dai-yu had by now awakened. She sensed that there was someone else in the room,
and guessing that it must be Bao-yu, lifted her head up to look. Sure enough, it was
he.
‘What are you doing here at this early hour?’
‘Early? Get up and have a look and then tell me if you think it’s early!’
‘You’d better go outside a minute if you want us to get up,’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-yu went into the outer room. Dai-yu got up as soon as he had gone out and
roused Xiang-yun. When the two girls had slipped into some clothes, Bao-yu came
inside again and sat himself down beside the dressing-table. Presently Night?ingale
and Kingfisher came in to help the girls with their toilet. Xiang-yun finished washing
first. Kingfisher was on her way out to empty the basin, when Bao-yu called her back:
‘Just a moment! While you are about it I may as well wash too and save myself the
trouble of going back to my own room.’
He came over to where she stood, and bending his head down over the basin,
scooped up two handfuls of water and began washing his face. Nightingale handed
him some scented soap.
‘It’s all right,’ he said, ‘there’s lots in here already.’
Then he asked for a towel.
Kingfisher pursed her lips up derisively:
‘You haven’t changed much, have you?’
Ignoring the sarcasm, he demanded crude salt to clean his teeth with, and after
rubbing it all round them vigorously with a finger, he rinsed his mouth out with water.
That part of his toilet completed, he observed that Xiang-yun had just finished doing
her hair and wandered over to where she was sitting.
‘Coz dear, do my hair for me, will you?’
‘I’m afraid I can’t,’ said Xiang-yun.
Bao-yu smiled coaxingly:
‘Go on, be a dear! You used to do it for me once.’
‘Well, I can’t any longer,’ said Xiang-yun. I’ve forgotten how to.’
‘It doesn’t need very much doing to it,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m not going out anywhere
today. Just a few plaits.’
He continued to coax and wheedle until at last she gave in, and taking his head in her
hands, sat him down in her place at the dressing-table and proceeded to comb and
dress his hair.
Bao-yu never wore any head-covering when he was at home. Instead he had his
side-hair done up in a number of little plaits which were looped round over his ears
and brought together by means of red silk thread into a single large queue at the
back. It was fastened by a golden clasp at the end and by four pearl clips at regular
intervals between the clasp and the crown of his head. As Xiang-yun plaited, she
noticed that a pearl appeared to be missing.
‘What’s happened to this clip?’ she said. ‘I’m sure it used to be the same as the
other three. Where has its pearl gone?’
‘I lost it,’ said Bao-yu.
‘I expect it fell off somewhere outside and somebody picked it up,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Lucky old somebody!’
‘Who knows whether or not he really lost it?’ said Dai-yu scoffingly. ‘For all we
know he may have given it to someone to have remounted as a keepsake!’
Bao-yu made no comment, but sat fiddling with the toilet articles that crowded the
dressing-table on either side of the mirror. He picked up a pot of rouge, almost
without realizing what he was doing, and sat with it poised in his hand, wanting to
put it to his lips for a little taste, but afraid Xiang-yun would rebuke him. While he
hesitated, Xiang-yun leaned forward from where she was sitting and administered a
sharp slap to his hand, causing the rouge-pot to fall from it on to the dressing-table.
‘Nathty habit!’ she said. ‘It’s time you gave it up!’
The words were scarcely out of her mouth when Aroma entered. She concluded from
the scene that met her eyes that Bao-yu had already completed his toilet, and went
back again to attend to her own. Soon after this Bao-chai dropped in.
‘Where’s Cousin Bao?’ she asked.
‘ “Cousin Bao” has no time to spend in here nowadays,’ said Aroma bitterly.
Bao-chai immediately understood.
Aroma sighed.
‘I say nothing against being friendly,’ she said. ‘But this hanging around there
morning, noon and night is another matter. However, nothing I say makes any
difference. It’s just a waste of breath.’
Bao-chai was impressed.
‘One mustn’t underestimate this maid,’ she thought to her?self. ‘She is obviously a
girl of some intelligence.’
And she sat down on the kang with her for a chat. In the course of conversation she
inquired casually about her age, family, and various other personal matters, paying
careful attention to her answers and gaining from them and from the tone in which
they were uttered an increasing respect for this uneducated maid.
Presently Bao-yu came in, whereupon Bao-chai got up and left. Bao-yu commented
on her departure:
‘Cousin Bao-chai seemed to be very thick with you just now. Why should she
suddenly rush off when I come into the room?’
There was no reply, so he repeated his question.
‘Are you asking me?’ said Aroma. ‘I don’t know what reasons you all have for your
comings and goings.’
The expression on her face as she uttered these words was angrier than he had ever
seen her look before.
He laughed.
‘Oh dear! Are you in a rage again?’
Aroma laughed mirthlessly.
‘It’s not for the likes of me to get into rages. But I wish that from now on you would
stop coming into this room. After all, you have got people to wait on you elsewhere.
You don’t really need my services. I shall go back to serving Her Old Ladyship, like I
used to before.’
With that she closed her eyes and lay back upon the kang.
Bao-yu was alarmed to see her in such a state and impulsively rushed over to the
kang to soothe her. But Aroma kept her eyes tightly shut and would take no notice.
Bao-yu did not know what to do. Just then Musk chanced to enter and he turned to
her for help:
‘What’s up with Aroma?’
‘How should I know?’ said Musk. ‘You’d do better to ask yourself that question.’
Bao-yu was so taken aback that for a while he said nothing. Then, finding their
combined hostility too much for him, he got up with a sigh from his suppliant
position on the kang.
‘All right, ignore me then! I’m going off to sleep, too.’
And he slid from the kang and went off to his own bed to lie down.
For a long time there was no sound from him except for a gentle snoring. Judging
that he must be really asleep, Aroma rose from the kang and took a large
travelling-cloak to cover him with. A moment later she heard a gentle thud. He had
whipped it from him and thrown it to the floor as soon as her back was turned. But
when she looked, his eyes were closed as before and he was still pretending to be
asleep. The significance of the gesture did not escape her. She nodded slowly and
regarded the feigned sleeper sarcastically:
‘All right, then! There’s no need for you to get angry. From now on I’ll just pretend
I’m dumb. I won’t say another word of criticism. Will that satisfy you?’
This was too much for Bao-yu. He sat bolt upright on his bed.
‘What am I supposed to have done this time? And what’s all this “criticism” you’re
talking about? If you had been criticizing me it wouldn’t be so bad; but when I came
in just now, you didn’t say anything: you simply ignored me. You went and lay down
in a huff without my having the faintest idea what it was all about, and now you
accuse me of behaving unreasonably! I haven’t heard a single peep out of you yet to
explain what it is that you are angry about I’
‘Your own conscience ought to tell you that,’ said Aroma. ‘You don’t need me to tell
you.’
They were still arguing when Grandmother Jia sent a ser?vant round to summon him
to lunch. He went off to the front apartment, but returned almost immediately after
bolting a single bowlful of rice. He found Aroma asleep on the kang and Musk sitting
beside her playing Patience with some dominoes. He had long known that Musk was
a close ally of Aroma’s, so ignoring them both, he marched past them into the inner
room, raising the door-curtain for himself as he passed through. Musk followed him
automatically, but he pushed her out:
‘No, no, I wouldn’t presume to trouble you!’
She laughed and went back to her Patience, having first ordered a couple of the
younger maids to wait on him in her stead.
In the inner room Bao-yu took up a book and reclined on the kang to read. For a
considerable while he remained engrossed in his reading. When eventually he did
look up, intending to ask someone for some tea, he saw two little maids waiting
there in silence, one of whom - evidently the older by a year or two - was an
attractive, intelligent-looking girl. He addressed himself to her:
‘Isn’t your name “Nella” something or other?’
‘Citronella.’
‘Citronella? Who on earth gave you that name?’
‘Aroma, sir. My real name is “Soldanella”, but Miss Aroma altered it to “Citronella”.’
‘I don’t know why she didn’t call you “Citric Acid” and have done with it,’ said
Bao-yu. ‘Citronella! - How many girls are there in your family, Citronella?’
‘Four,’ said Citronella.
‘And which of the four are you?’
‘I’m the youngest.’
‘Right!’ said Bao-yu. ‘In future you will be called Number Four”. We’re not going to
have any more of these floral fragrances around here. It’s an insult to decent scents
and flowers to give their names to you lot!’
Then he asked her to pour him some tea.
Listening attentively in the outer room, ‘Flowers’ Aroma and her Musky ally — for
whose ears this gibe was intended — were nearly bursting themselves in their efforts
not to laugh.
All that day Bao-yu stayed in his own room, seeing no one. It was gloomy on his own,
with nothing but reading and a little writing for amusement, but he refused to make
use of any of his usual attendants and would have only “Number Four” to wait on
him. Though he did not realize it, she was a designing little minx and endeavoured by
every artifice at her command to get her hooks into him while she had the chance.
After dinner Bao-yu came back flushed and slightly tipsy, having taken a few cups of
wine with his meal. Normally this would have been the occasion for an evening of
hilarity with Aroma and the rest, but today he would have to sit by his lamp alone in
cheerless isolation. The prospect was a depressing one. Yet if he were to go running
after her, it would seem too much like a capitulation, and her nagging would
thenceforth become insufferable. On the other hand, to frighten her into some sort
of compliance by asserting his mastery over her would be heartless. There was
nothing else for it: he would just have to grin and bear it.
‘Suppose they were all dead,’ he said to himself. ‘I should have to make do on my
own somehow or other!’
The thought was strangely comforting. He was able to stop worrying. He even began
to feel quite cheerful. Having instructed Number Four to trim up the lamp and brew
him a pot of tea, he settled down to a volume of Zhuang-zi. Presently he came to the
following passage in the chapter called ‘Rifling Trunks’:

Away then with saints and wise men, and the big thieves will cease from despoiling.
Discard your jades, destroy your pearls, and the little thieves will cease from pilfering.
Burn your tallies, smash your seals, and the common people will revert to their
natural integrity. Break all the bushels and snap all the steelyards, and they will have
no further grounds for dispute. Obliterate those ‘sacred laws’ by which the world is
governed, and you will find yourself at last able to reason with them. If you confuse
the pitch? pipes, break up the organs, unstring the zithers and stop up Shi Kuang’s
ears, people will begin to make proper use of their own hearing. If you abolish all
intricacy of design and brilliancy of colouring and glue up Li Zhu’s eyes, people will
begin to make proper use of their own eyesight. And if you destroy your arcs and
lines, throw away your compasses and set-squares and break the fingers of Chui the
Cunning, people will begin to make proper use of their own skill…

The words wonderfully suited his present mood. He read no further. Impulsively
picking up a writing-brush, and with the inspiration lent him by his tipsiness, he
added the following lines in the margin:

Away then with Musk and Aroma, and the female tongue will cease from nagging.
Discard Bao-chai’s heavenly beauty, destroy Dai-yu’s divine intelligence, utterly
abolish all tender feelings, and the female heart will cease from envy. If the female
tongue ceases from nagging there will be no further fear of quarrels and
estrangements; if Bao-chai’s heavenly beauty is discarded there will be no further
grounds for tender admiration; and if Dai-yu’s divine intelligence is des?troyed there
will be no further cause for romantic imaginings. These Bao-chais, Dai-yus, Aromas
and Musks spread their nets and dig their pits, and all the world are bewitched and
ensnared by them.

Having written these lines, he threw down the brush and went straight to bed.
He was asleep almost as soon as his head touched the pillow and remained dead to
the world throughout the whole of that night. Waking with the first light next
morning, he sat up in bed to find Aroma lying fully clothed beside him outside the
covers. He roused her with a gentle shake, all yesterday’s un?pleasantness now quite
forgotten:
‘Go to bed properly! You’ll get cold, sleeping like that!’
Aroma had not, on the day previous to this, openly criticized Bao-yu for disporting
himself at all hours of the day and night with his girl cousins because she knew from
experience that criticism was powerless to change him. To alert him to the error of
his ways she had instead adopted a more passive approach. She had confidently
expected this new method to produce a speedy repentance, followed by a swift
return to normal relations; so that when, contrary to her expectation, a whole day
went by without his having manifested the looked-for change of heart, she was left
with no further resources, and as a consequence had been too worried to sleep
properly for the greater part of that night.
But now here he was addressing her normally once more. He must have undergone a
change of heart during the night. She forced herself to ignore him still, in order to
drive the lesson home.
Meeting with no response, Bao-yu reached out his hand to help her get undressed;
but he had got no further than undo?ing the first button when she pushed his hand
away and did it up again. He was at a loss to know what to do with her. With a gentle
smile he took her by the hand:
‘Now - what’s the matter?’
He had to repeat the question several times. She fixed her eyes on him angrily:
‘Nothing’s the matter. But now you’re awake, hadn’t you better hurry over to the
other place to get washed? If you delay much longer, you might not be in time.’
‘What other place?’ said Bao-yu.
Aroma smiled coldly.
‘Why ask me? How should I know? Go wherever you like for your toilet! Let’s make
a clean break from now on, you and I, and perhaps we’ll have a bit less of all this
bickering and making ourselves ridiculous in front of the others. I mean to say, even if
you get tired of going there, you’ve always got your Number Fours and Number Fives
back here to wait on you. But as for the rest of us: even our names are “an insult to
decent scents and flowers”!’
Bao-yu laughed:
‘Do you still remember that?’
‘I’ll remember that if I live to be a hundred I’ said Aroma. ‘I’m not like you: treating
everything I say like so much wind and forgetting in the morning what you said
yourself the night before!’
There was something about her pretty face suffused with anger that Bao-yu found
infinitely touching. He snatched up a jade hairpin that was lying beside the pillow and
snapped it in two.
‘So be it with me if I ever fail to listen to you again!’ he said.
‘What a way to carry on at this hour of the morning!’ said Aroma, hurriedly picking
up the pieces. ‘Whether you listen to me or not is up to you. There’s no need to get
into such a state about it!’
‘You don’t know how worried you make me,’ said Bao-yu.
‘So you feel worried, do you?’ said’ Aroma smiling. ‘Now perhaps you’ll have some
idea what I feel like most 6f the time! – Come on, let’s get washed!’
With that the two of them got up and began their toilet.
Later, after Bao-yu had gone off to the front apartment, Dai-yu looked in
unexpectedly, and not finding Bao-yu in, began idly turning over the books that were
lying on his desk. Chancing to light on the volume of Zhuang-zi that he had been
reading the night before, her eye was drawn to the lines he had written in the margin.
They both vexed and amused her, and she could not resist picking up a writing-brush
and adding the following quatrain on the remaining blank space:

What wretch would here, with scurrile pen,
The text of Zhuang-zi plagiarize,
And, heedless of his own great faults,
Fright others with his wicked lies?

That done, she went to the front apartment to see Grand?mother Jia, and from there
on to Lady Wang’s.
*
She found everyone at Lady Wang’s in a great to-do. Xi-feng’s baby daughter was ill.
The doctor had been called and had just finished taking her pulses.
‘Convey my congratulations to Her Ladyship and Mrs Lian’— the doctor’s diagnosis
was couched in the strange language which custom decrees in such cases — ‘I am
happy to inform them that the little girl’s sickness is the small-pox!’
Lady Wang and Xi-feng at once sent back to inquire whether the child was in any
danger. The doctor made the following reply:
‘Variola is, of course, a dangerous disease, but provided there are no complications,
most cases of it are recuperable. Let the ladies lay in a plentiful supply of sanguis
caudae, or pig’s tail blood, and plenty of essence of mulberry-worm. Applied
externally these will ensure a satisfactory development of the pustules.’
Xi-feng immediately became very busy. A room had to be swept out and prepared for
the worship of the Smallpox Goddess. Orders had to be given to the servants to avoid
the use of all fried and sautéed cookery. Patience had to be told to move Jia Lian’s
clothes and bedding to a room outside - for sexual abstinence, too, was enjoined on
the parents of the sufferer. A length of dark-red cloth had to be procured and made
up into a dress for the child by the combined labours of the nurses, maids and female
relations most closely associated with it. Finally, a ritually purified room had to be
made ready for the two doctors who would take it in turns to examine the little
patient and make up her medicines, and who would not be permitted to return to
their own homes until the customary period of twelve days had elapsed. These
arrangements having been completed, Jia Lian went off to the outer study which was
from now on to be his bedroom, while Xi-feng and Patience joined Lady Wang in the
daily worship and propitiation of the Smallpox Goddess.
Jia Lian was the sort of man who will begin getting up to mischief the moment he
takes leave of his wife. After only a couple of nights sleeping on his own he began to
find abstin?ence extremely irksome and was reduced to slaking his fires on the more
presentable of his pages. But other relief was at hand.
Among the domestic staff at the Rong-guo mansion was a certain drunken,
dilapidated cook, by surname Duo, who, because of his weakness of character and
general uselessness, had acquired the nickname of ‘Droopy Duo’. Two years previous
to this date Droopy’s father had provided him with a wife. She was now just turned
twenty, a fine, good-looking young wanton, always eager to throw herself at
whatever partners opportunity might place in her way. Droopy Duo raised no
objection to her infidelities. As long as he had meat to eat and wine to drink and
money in his pocket he saw no reason to concern himself about anything else.
Consequently there was scarcely an able-bodied male in the Ning-guo and Rong-guo
mansions who had not at one time or another sampled her wares. Because of her
pneumatic charms and omnivorous promiscuity this voluptuous young limmer was
referred to by all and sundry as ‘the Mattress’.
Jia Lian, now separated from the wife of his bosom and fairly frying with unsatisfied
desires, had for some time past been aware of the Mattress’s charms; but though his
mouth had long watered to enjoy them, what with fear of his jealous young wife on
the one hand and fear of his fancy boys on the other, he had so far found no
opportunity of approaching her.
The Mattress, too, had for some time past had her eye on Jia Lian, and it was a
source of regret to her that he had so far proved unapproachable. Learning that he
had now moved to his study outside, she managed to find excuses for passing by that
way three or four times in a day, provoking Jia Lian to a pitch of frantic eagerness
only to be compared with that of a starving rat confronted by some food. He was
obliged to seek the advice of his pages and to promise them rich rewards if they
could procure her for his pleasure. The pages were ready enough to oblige — the
more so as they were themselves old customers of hers - and the request for an
assignation was no sooner made than granted.
At about ten o’clock that night, when all were abed and Droopy Duo lay collapsed on
the kang in drunken slumbers, Jia Lian slipped noiselessly into the room for his
pre-arranged meeting with the Mattress. The mere sight of her proved so potent a
stimulant that without wasting any time on tender preliminaries, he took down his
trousers and set to work at once.
Now this wife of Duo’s had a physical peculiarity which was that as soon as the man’s
body came into contact with her own she felt a delicious melting sensation invading
her limbs, rendering her body soft and yielding to that of her partner, so that he had
the impression of lying on a heap of down; and in addition to this natural
endowment she knew more tricks of posture and more ways of exciting a man with
murmured lewdnesses and amorous cries than a professional prostitute.
As Jia Lian lay on top of her, wishing he could melt into her body from sheer excess of
pleasure, she began to exercise this last accomplishment.
‘Your little girl’s got the smallpox,’ she murmured. ‘While they’re worshipping the
Goddess, you are supposed to keep yourself pure. Naughty man! You’re making
yourself unclean because of me. You must leave me! Go away!’
Jia Lian’s movements became more violent.
‘You are my only goddess!’ he said, panting heavily. ‘I care for no other goddess but
you!’
At this the Mattress began to grow even more reckless in her incitements and Jia Lian
to reveal the more disgusting of his sexual accomplishments.
They lay a long time together when it was over, exchanging oaths and promises,
unable to break apart. From that day on?wards there was a secret understanding
between them.
A day arrived when the smallpox poison had spent itself and Baby’s pustules showed
signs of drying up. After the twelfth day the Smallpox Goddess was ceremoniously
ushered off the premises, the entire family joined in a service of thanks?giving to
Heaven and the ancestors, and there was much burn?ing of incense in discharge of
vows made on the child’s behalf by various of its members, and much exchanging of
congratulations and paying out of rewards. When all this was over, Jia Lian returned
once more to the matrimonial couch. ‘A night after absence is better than a wedding
night’ as the proverb crudely puts it, and certainly the affection shown that night by
Jia Lian for his lady was of more than usual intensity.
Early next morning, when Xi-feng had gone off to Grandmother Jia’s, Patience began
putting away the clothes and bedding that had been brought in from the outer study.
To her surprise she felt something strange in the cover of Jia Lian’s head-rest, and
after groping inside it, fished out a black, silky tress of woman’s hair. Quick to
understand its significance, she hid it in her sleeve and going across to the other
room, showed it to Jia Lian and asked him what it was.
As soon as he saw the hair, Jia Lian rushed forward to snatch it from her. She darted
away, but he seized hold of her, and forcing her on to the kang, attempted to wrest it
from her grasp.
‘Mean thing!’ said Patience. ‘After I’ve gone to the trouble of asking you about it
behind her back, you have to start being rough!’
Just at that moment they heard Xi-feng coming. Jia Lian didn’t know whether to let
go of Patience or make a final effort to obtain the hair. Finally, with a muttered
entreaty, he re?leased her:
‘Angel! Don’t let her know!’
Patience managed to get up just as Xi-feng was entering.
‘Quick!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Open up the chest and find that pattern for Her Ladyship!’
‘Yes madam,’ said Patience.
While Patience was looking for the pattern, Xi-feng caught sight of Jia Lian and
suddenly thought of something else.
‘Have we got the things back from the outer study yet?’
‘Yes,’ said Patience.
‘Was there anything missing?’
‘No,’ said Patience. ‘I went through them very carefully, but there was nothing
missing.’
‘Was there anything there that shouldn’t have been?’
Patience laughed.
‘Isn’t it enough that there was nothing missing? Why should there be anything
extra?’
Xi-feng laughed, too.
‘He was nearly a fortnight outside. I wouldn’t bank on his having kept himself clean
all that time. There might have been something left behind by one of his little friends:
a ring or a sash or something.’
Jia Lian turned pale with fright. He grimaced piteously at Patience from behind
Xi-feng’s back, and drawing a finger across his throat, silently entreated her to keep
her discovery hidden.
Patience affected not to notice him.
‘It’s funny you should say that, Mrs Lian. Exactly the same thought occurred to me;
but though I went through his things very carefully, I didn’t find anything suspicious.
If you don’t believe me, you can have a look yourself.’
‘Silly girl!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Do you imagine that if there were really anything there he
would let us look?’
And taking the pattern from her she went out again. Patience pointed a finger at her
own nose and wagged her head from side to side.
‘How are you going to thank me for that?’
‘You’re a sweet little darling!’
He beamed delightedly and lunged forward to embrace her. Patience dangled the
hair in front of him:
‘You’ll have to watch your step from now on,’ she said. ‘Now I’ve got something to
keep you in order with. If you misbehave...!’
‘All right, you look after it, then. But’ - his tone became entreating - ‘don’t,
whatever you do, let her find out!’
He said this to put her off her guard. As soon as her defences were relaxed he made a
quick grab and snatched it from her.
‘Perhaps you’d better not have it, after all,’ he said with a grin of triumph. ‘If I have
it I can burn it, and then it’s all over and done with.’
He stowed the hair in the side of his boot as he said this. Patience clenched her teeth
in anger.
‘You’re mean! Burn the bridge when you’re safely over the river - that’s your way,
isn’t it? All right then, you needn’t expect me to tell lies for you in future!’
In Jia Lian’s lascivious eyes her anger made her adorable. He felt himself becoming
excited, and throwing his arms round her, he asked her to let him take her. But
Patience struggled free and ran from the room, leaving him doubled up in a fury of
frustrated desire.
‘Little cock-teaser!’ he shouted after her. ‘You deliberately provoked me, and now
you run away!’
‘Who provoked you?’ Patience giggled from outside the window. ‘You shouldn’t be
so randy! Do you expect me to make the Mistress hate me just for the sake of making
you feel comfortable?’
‘You needn’t worry about her,’ said Jia Lian. ‘One of these days when I get my
temper up I’m going to lay into that jealous whore and break every bone in her body.
Then perhaps she’ll know who’s master round here. She watches me like a bloody
thief. She can talk to men when she likes, but I’m not supposed to talk to women, oh
no! If I’m talking to a woman and just happen to get a bit close, she immediately
starts suspecting something. But if she wants to go chattering and larking around
with Bao or Rong or any other bloody male on the premises, that’s supposed to be all
right! You wait! One of these days I’ll stop her seeing anyone at all!’
‘She’s every right to watch you,’ said Patience, ‘and you’ve no right at all to be
jealous of her. She’s always been perfectly straight and above board where men are
concerned; but you — whatever you do you’ve got something nasty in mind! You
make even me worried, never mind about her!’
‘Oh, shut up! ‘ said Jia Lian. ‘You’re all perfect, aren’t you? It’s just me that’s always
up to something nasty! One of these days I’ll make a clean sweep of the lot of you!’
Just at that moment Xi-feng stepped into the courtyard and saw Patience standing
outside the window.
‘If you want to talk,’ she said, ‘why not talk inside the room? What’s the idea of
running outside and bawling through the window?’
‘Don’t ask her!’ said Jia Lian’s voice from inside. ‘She thinks there’s a tiger in the
room and she’s afraid of being eaten!’
‘He’s in there on his own,’ said Patience. ‘What should I be doing in there with
him?’
‘All the more reason for being in there, I should have thought, if he’s on his own,’
said Xi-feng, smiling rather spite?fully.
‘Is that remark intended for me?’ said Patience.
‘Who else?’ said Xi-feng.
‘You’ll make me say something I shall feel sorry for in a minute,’ said Patience; and
instead of standing aside and raising the door-blind for her mistress, she entered
ahead of her, dropped it rudely in her face, and marched angrily through the
sitting-room to one of the rooms at the back.
‘What’s the matter with Patience? The girl’s gone mad!’ said Xi-feng when she had
raised the blind again and let her?self in. ‘I really do believe she is trying to displace
me. You’d better look out, my friend: I’ll have the hide off you!’
‘Bravo! Good for Patience!’ said Jia Lian, who had re?treated on to the kang and
was applauding the comedy from that safer eminence. ‘I didn’t know she had it in her.
In future I shall take that girl more seriously.’
‘It’s you who’ve let her get above herself,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I hold you directly
responsible for this!’
‘Oh no!’ said Jia Lian. ‘If you two want to quarrel, I’m not going to stand between
you and take all the knocks, I’m getting out of here!’
‘I’m sure I don’t know where you think you’ll go to,’ said Xi-feng.
‘Don’t you worry, I’ve got somewhere to go to,’ said Jia Lian, and he began to go;
but Xi-feng stopped him.
‘No, don’t go! There’s something else I want to talk to you about.’
But if you want to know what it was, you will have to wait for the next chapter.




CHAPTER 22

Bao-yu finds Zen enlightenment
in an operatic aria
And Jia Zheng sees portents of doom in
lantern riddles

Hearing that Xi-feng wanted to consult him about something, Jia Lian halted and
asked her what it was.
‘It’s Bao-chai’s birthday on the twenty-first,’ said Xi-feng. ‘What do you think we
ought to do about it?’
‘How should I know?’ said Jia Lian. ‘You’ve managed plenty of big birthday
celebrations before in your time. Why have you become so helpless all of a sudden?’
‘There are fixed rules for everything when you are planning a big grown-up
celebration,’ said Xi-feng; ‘but in Bao-chai’s case she’s neither exactly grown-up nor
exactly a child any longer. That’s why I wanted your advice.’
Jia Lian lowered his head and thought for a moment.
‘Why, you’re being stupid!’ he said presently. ‘There’s a precedent right in front of
you. What about Dai-yu? All you’ve got to do is find what arrangements you made in
the past for her and do exactly the same for Bao-chai now.’
‘Do you suppose I didn’t think of that?’ said Xi-feng with scorn. ‘I’m not that stupid!
The point is that yesterday, be?cause of something Grandma said, I started asking
them all their birthdays and ages, and it seems that on this birthday of hers on the
twenty-first Bao-chai is going to be fifteen. Now that doesn’t qualify for a full-scale
celebration, but it is a sort of coming-of-age, and when Grandma heard about it she
said she wanted to sponsor something for it herself. So obviously, whatever we do, it
can’t be quite the same as what we’ve done in the past for Dai-yu.’
‘Well in that case,’ said Jia Lian, ‘take what you did for Dai-yu as a basis and just add
on a bit.’
‘That’s what I’d thought of doing,’ said Xi-feng; ‘but I wanted to see what you
thought before doing anything definite, because I didn’t want to go adding extras on
my own initiative and then have you complaining that you hadn’t been properly
consulted.’
‘You can cut that out!’ said Jia Lian — though not ill-?humouredly. ‘You know you
don’t really mean a word of it! Just stop snooping on me all the time, that’s all I ask.
You won’t hear any complaints from me then about not being consulted!’
With that he walked off: but whither, or to whom, our narrative does not disclose.
It tells us instead that Shi Xiang-yun, having spent a con?siderable part of the New
Year holiday with the Jias, was now on the point of returning home, but was urged by
Grand?mother Jia to wait for Bao-chai’s birthday and not go back until she had seen
the plays. Xiang-yun agreed to stay and sent someone home with instructions to tell
them that she would be returning a little later than planned and to fetch a couple of
pieces of her own embroidery that she could give to Bao-chai as a birthday-present.
Ever since Bao-chai’s first arrival, Grandmother Jia had been pleasurably impressed
by her placid and dependable disposition, and now that she was about to spend her
first ‘big’ birthday in the Jia household, the old lady resolved to make it a memorable
one. Taking twenty taels of silver from her private store, she summoned Xi-feng and
directed her to spend it on providing wine and plays for a celebration. Xi-feng made
this the occasion for a little raillery.
‘If the old lady says she wants her grandchild’s birthday celebrated,’ she said, ‘then
celebrated it must be, and we must all jump to it without arguing! But if she’s going
to start asking for plays as well, all I can say to that is that if she’s in the mood for a
bit of fun, I’m afraid she’s going to have to pay for it. She’s going to have to cough up
something out of those private savings of hers she’s been hoarding all these years -
not wait until the last minute and then fish out a measly little twenty taels to pay for
the party: that’s just another way of telling us we’ve got to pay for it ourselves. I
mean, if you were really hard up, it would be another matter: but you’ve got boxes
and boxes of boodle — the bottoms are dropping out of them, they’re so full! It’s
pure meanness, that’s what it is! You forget, Grannie, when you go to heaven young
Bao-yu won’t be the only one who’ll walk ahead of the hearse. You’ve got other
grandchildren too, don’t forget! You don’t have to leave everything to him. The rest
of us may not be much use, but you mustn’t be too hard on us. Twenty taels! Do you
really think that’s enough to pay for a party and plays?’
At this point the entire company burst into laughter, which Grandmother Jia joined in
herself.
‘Just listen to her!’ she said. ‘I thought I had a fairly sharp tongue, but I’m no match
for this one: “Clack-clack, clack-clack” — it’s worse than a pair of wooden clappers!
Even your mother-in-law daren’t argue with me, my dear! Don’t pick on me!’
‘Mother-in-law is just as soppy about Bao-yu as you are,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ve got no
one to tell my troubles to. And you say I’m sharp-tongued!’
Xi-feng’s mock-lugubriousness set the old lady off in another squall of laughter. She
loved to be teased, and Xi-feng’s bantering put her in great good humour.
That night, when the young folk had finished paying their evening duty and were
standing round her laughing and talking a while before retiring to their own
apartments, Grandmother Jia asked Bao-chai what sort of plays she liked best and
what her favourite dishes were. Bao-chai was well aware that her grandmother, like
most old women, enjoyed the livelier, more rackety sort of plays and liked sweet and
pappy things to eat, so she framed her answers entirely in terms of these preferences.
The old lady was delighted.
Next day presents of clothing and various other objects, to which Lady Wang, Xi-feng,
Dai-yu and the rest had all contributed, were sent round to Bao-chai’s. Our narrative
supplies no details.
At last the twenty-first arrived. A dear little stage had been erected in the courtyard
outside Grandmother Jia’s apartment and a newly trained troupe of child actors able
to perform both Kun-qu and the noisier Yi-qiang type of plays had been en?gaged. In
the apartment’s main sitting-room a semicircle of little tables were arranged facing
outwards towards the stage and laid in preparation for a feast. No outsiders were
invited. The guests of honour were Aunt Xue, Shi Xiang-yun and Bao-?chai herself. All
the others invited were members of the family.
Early that morning Bao-yu, not seeing Dai-yu around, went to look for her in her
room and found her still reclining on the kang.
‘Get up and have something to eat!’ he said. ‘The players will be starting shortly.
Tell me some play you like so that I shall know which one to choose!’
‘If you’re so anxious to please me,’ said Dai-yu coldly, ‘you ought to hire a troupe
specially and put on all my favourites. It’s a cheap sort of kindness to treat me at
someone else’s expense!’
‘Never mind!’ said Bao-yu. ‘When we hire a troupe for you, you’ll be able to return
the compliment.’
He hauled her up from the kang, and the two of them went off hand in hand
together.
As soon as they had eaten, it was time to talk about choosing the plays and
Grandmother Jia called on Bao-chai to begin. Bao-chai made a show of declining; but
it was her birthday, and in the end she gave in and selected a piece about Monkey
from The Journey to the West. Grandmother Jia was pleased.
Aunt Xue was now invited to pick a play, but as her own daughter had just chosen,
she refused. Grandmother Jia did not press her and passed on to Xi-feng. Xi-feng
would nor?mally have refused to take precedence over her aunt and mother-in-law,
who were both present, but Grandmother had commanded and must be obeyed. As
she happened to know that the old lady’s partiality for lively plays was particularly
strong in the case of those which had lots of jokes and clowning in them, she selected
a piece entitled Liu Er Pawns His Clothes in order to make sure that this element was
not lacking from the programme. As she had anticipated, Grand?mother Jia was even
more delighted by this second choice.
Next Dai-yu was asked to choose. She deferred to Aunt Xing and Aunt Wang; but
Grandmother Jia was insistent:
‘I’ve brought you young people here today for some fun,’ she said. ‘I want you to
enjoy yourselves. Never mind about them! I didn’t go to all this trouble just for their
sakes! They are lucky to be here at all, having all this good food and enter?tainment
for nothing: you surely don’t think that on top of that I’m going to let them choose
the plays?’
The others all laughed, and Dai-yu chose a play. Then Bao-yu, Shi Xiang-yun,
Ying-chun, Tan-chun, Xi-chun and Li Wan each chose a play in turn, after which the
little players proceeded to perform them in the order in which they had been
selected.
When the time came to bring in the wine and begin the feast, Grandmother Jia
invited Bao-chai to choose again. This time she asked for Zhi-shen at the Monastery
Gate.
‘Why do you keep choosing plays like that?’ said Bao-yu.
‘To hear you talk, it doesn’t sound as if all your years of play-going have taught you
much,’ said Bao-chai. ‘This is an excellent play, both from the point of view of the
music and of the words.’
‘I can’t stand noisy plays,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I never could.’
‘If you call this a noisy play,’ said Bao-chai, ‘it proves that you don’t know what
you’re talking about. Come over here and I’ll explain. This Zhi-shen at the Monastery
Gate is a “Ruby Lips” sequence in the Northern mode. That means, musically
speaking, that it is in a vigorous, somewhat staccato style. In fact the musical
excellence of this piece goes without saying. But apart from that, the libretto is good,
too. The words of Zhi-shen’s “Clinging Vine” aria, which is the last but one in the
sequence, are particularly fine.’
Bao-yu was interested, drew his chair closer, and begged her to let him hear them.
Lowering her voice so as not to dis?turb the others, she half-sang, half-recited them
for his benefit:

        ‘I dash aside the manly tear
        And take leave of my monkish home.
        A word of thanks to you, my Master dear,
        Who tonsured me before the Lotus Throne:
        ‘T was not my luck to stay with you,
        And in a short while I must say adieu,
        Naked and friendless through the world to roam.
        I ask no goods, no gear to take away,
        Only straw sandals and a broken bowl,
        To beg from place to place as best I may.’

Bao-yu listened enthralled tapping his knee and nodding his head in time to her
singing. When she had done, he agreed enthusiastically about the excellence of the
words and congratulated her on the extraordinary breadth of her know?ledge.
‘Sh!’ said Dai-yu, looking round crossly in Bao-yu’s direction. ‘Can’t you be a bit
quieter and attend to the play? This is Zhi-shen at the Monastery Gate we’re
supposed to be listening to, not Jing-de Acts the Madman!’
Xiang-yun found this very funny.
They continued to watch plays until the evening. Grand?mother Jia had taken a
particular fancy to the little player who had acted the heroine’s parts and the one
who had played the clown, and when the last performance was over, she asked for
them to be brought in to see her. She found them very ‘sweet’ - even more so on a
closer inspection - and asked them their ages. The leading lady turned out to be
eleven and the clown only nine! There were murmurs and exclamations from all
present when they heard this, and Grandmother Jia told someone to give them
delicacies from the table and a present of money each, in addition to what they
would receive as members of the troupe.
Meanwhile Xi-feng appeared to be very much amused about something.
‘The way that child there is made-up makes him look so like someone we know,’
she said. ‘Haven’t any of you noticed?’
Bao-chai knew whom she was referring to, but merely nodded her head slightly
without replying. Bao-yu, too, nodded, but did not dare to reply. Only Xiang-yun was
tactless enough to say anything:
‘Oh, I know!’ she blurted out. ‘Like Cousin Lin, you mean?’
Bao-yu shot a quick glance in her direction; but it was too late. Xiang-yun’s reply had
prompted the others to look more carefully, with the result that they all
instantaneously burst out laughing, so striking was the resemblance. Shortly after
this the party broke up.
During the evening Xiang-yun ordered Kingfisher to start packing. Kingfisher
remonstrated:
‘What’s the hurry? Why not wait till we’re going? There’ll be plenty of time before
we go.’
‘We’re going first thing tomorrow,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘What’s the point of staying any
longer? You can see from the looks on their faces that we are not welcome here.’
Bao-yu chanced to overhear this remark and hurried in to her:
‘You’re wrong to be offended with me, coz. The others all know how sensitive
Cousin Lin is, and they wouldn’t answer because they were afraid of upsetting her.
When you sud?denly spoke up without realizing, I knew she was bound to be upset,
and that’s the reason why I looked at you like that. I was worried for your sake,
because I was afraid she would be offended with you. That you should now get angry
with me is really rather unfair. If it had been anyone else but you, I shouldn’t have
minded whether they offended her or not. I shouldn’t have felt that much concern
about them.’
Xiang-yun silenced him with an imperious wave of her hand:
‘You can save your fine speeches for someone else. They’re wasted on me.
Obviously I’m not in the same class as your Cousin Lin. It’s all right for other people
to laugh at her; but as soon as I say anything about her, I’m at once in the wrong. I’m
not really worthy to speak about her at all. She’s the young lady of the house. I’m
only a little nobody!’
‘I was only thinking of you,’ said Bao-yu in great agitation, ‘yet now you put me in
the wrong. May I straightway turn into dust and be trodden beneath ten thousand
feet if I had any but the kindest intentions!’
‘You are too glib with your ridiculous oaths,’ said Xiang-?yun. ‘This is no time for
swearing. You can keep that kind of talk for that sensitive, easily upset person you
were talking about. She knows how to handle you. Don’t try it on me: it makes me
thick!’
With these words she walked off into the inner room of Grandmother Jia’s apartment
and lay down on the kang in a rage.
Very much out of countenance, Bao-yu went off to look for Dai-yu. She must have
been waiting for him, for just as he was entering the room, she pushed him out again
and shut the door. Totally at a loss to understand her behaviour, he called to her
softly through the window:
‘Dai, dear! Dai!’
But she took no notice.
Bao-yu stood there disconsolately, hanging his head in silence. Nightingale knew
what was happening, but judged the time not ripe for her to intervene; so he
continued to stand there like an idiot, until at last Dai-yu thought he must have gone
back to his own room, and opened the door again. When she saw him still standing
there, she had not the heart to shut the door on him a second time, and allowed him
to follow her back into the room.
‘There’s always a reason for everything,’ he said. ‘If you tell people what it is, they
don’t feel so bad about it. You can’t suddenly get angry with me for no reason
whatever. What is all this about?’
‘Don’t ask me! said Dai-yu coldly. ‘I don’t know. I’m only a figure of fun - the sort of
person you might compare with a child actor in order to get a good laugh from the
others.’
‘I never made the comparison,’ said Bao-yu hotly, ‘and I never laughed at you. Why
should you be angry with me?’
‘You would like to have made the comparison; you would like to have laughed,’ said
Dai-yu. “To me your way of not comparing and not laughing was worse than the
others’ laughing and comparing!’
Bao-yu found this unanswerable.
‘However,’ Dai-yu went on, ‘that I could forgive. But what about that look you gave
Yun? Just what did you mean by that? I think I know what you meant. You meant to
warn her that she would cheapen herself by joking with me as an equal. Because
she’s an Honourable and her uncle’s a marquis and I’m only the daughter of a
commoner, she mustn’t risk joking with me, because it would be so degrading for her
if I were to answer back. That’s what you meant, isn’t it? Oh yes, you had the kindest
intentions. Only unfortunately she didn’t want your kind intentions and got angry
with you in spite of them. So you tried to make it up with her at my expense, by
telling her how touchy I am and how easily I get upset. You were afraid she might
offend me, were you? As if it were any busi?ness of yours whether she offended me
or not, or whether or not I got angry with her!’
When Bao-yu heard her say this, he knew she must have overheard every word of his
conversation with Xiang-yun. He reflected that he had only acted in the first place
from a desire to keep the peace between them: yet the only outcome of his good
intentions had been a telling-off by either party. It put him in mind of something he
had read a day or two previously in Zhuang-zi:

        The cunning waste their pains;
        The wise men vex their brains;
        But the simpleton, who seeks no gains,
        With belly full, he wanders free
        As drifting boat upon the sea.

and of another passage from the same book about timber trees inviting the axe and
sweet springs being the cause of their own contamination. The more he thought
about it, the more dejected he became.
‘If I can’t even get on with the few people I live with now,’ he asked himself, ‘how
am I going to manage later on...?’
At that point in his reflections it seemed to him that there was no further point in
arguing, and he turned to go back to his room.
Dai-yu realized that he must have thought of something upsetting to go off like this.
But not to be answered was al?together too provoking. She felt the anger mounting
inside her.
‘All right, go!’ she shouted after him. ‘And don’t ever come back! And don’t ever
speak to me again!’
Bao-yu ignored her. He went straight back to his own room, threw himself on the bed,
and lay staring at the ceiling. Aroma knew what the trouble was but dared not, for
the time being at any rate, refer to it. She tried distracting him with talk of other
matters.
‘I suppose there’ll be more plays after today, won’t there? Miss Bao is sure to give a
return party, isn’t she?’
‘Whether she does or not,’ said Bao-yu, ‘what concern is it of mine?’
This was certainly not the sort of answer Aroma was used to getting. She tried again,
smiling breezily:
‘That’s no way of looking at it! This is the New Year holi?days, when their ladyships
and the young ladies are all en?joying themselves. We can’t have you mooning
around like this!’
‘Whether their ladyships and the young ladies are enjoying themselves or not,’ said
Bao-yu, ‘what concern is it of mine?’
Aroma laughed.
‘Seeing that they’re all doing their best to be agreeable, couldn’t you try to do
likewise? Surely it’s much better ail round if everyone will give and take a bit?’
‘What do you mean, “give and take a bit”?’ said Bao-yu in the same lack-lustre
voice as before. ‘They can give and take a bit if they like. My destiny is a different
one:
naked and friendless through the world to roam.’
A tear stole down his cheek as he recalled the line from the aria.
He continued to ponder its words and to savour their mean?ing, and ended up by
bursting into tears and crying outright. Jumping up from the bed, he went over to his
desk, took up a writing-brush, and wrote down the following lines in imitation of a
Buddhist gāthā:
         I swear, you swear,
         With heart and mind declare;
         But our protest
         Is no true test.
          It would be best
          Words unexpressed
          To understand,
          And on that ground
          To take our stand.
After writing it, he was still not satisfied. Though now enlightened himself, he feared
that someone reading his gāthā might not be able to share his enlightenment.
Accordingly, with the words of the ‘Clinging Vine’ aria still running in his head, he
added another set of verses after it to explain his point. That done, he read the whole
through to himself out loud, then, with a wonderful feeling of liberation, went to bed
and fell fast asleep.
Curious to know the sequel to Bao-yu’s departure, Dai?-yu, on the pretext of wanting
to see Aroma about something, eventually came round herself to have a look. Aroma
told her that Bao-yu was already in bed asleep. She was on the point of going back
again when Aroma smilingly detained her:
‘Just a moment, Miss! There’s a note here. Would you like to see what it says?’
She handed her the sheet of paper containing Bao-yu’s gāthā and the ‘Clinging Vine’
poem. Dai-yu could see that they must have been written under the influence of
their recent quarrel and could not help feeling both amused by them and a little
sorry. But all she said to Aroma was:
‘It’s only a joke. Nothing of any consequence.’
She took it with her back to her own room and showed it to Xiang-yun. Next day she
showed it to Bao-chai as well. Bao-chai glanced at the second poem. This is what
Bao-yu had written:
              You would have been at fault, if not for me;
              But why should I care if they disagree?
              Free come, free go, let nothing bar or hold me!
              No more I’ll sink and soar between gloom and elation,
              Or endlessly debate the depth of our relation.
              What was the point of all of that past pother?
              When I look back on it, it seems scarce worth the bother.

Then she read the gāthā. She laughed.
‘I’m afraid this is all my fault. It must have been that aria I told him about yesterday
which started it all. Those Taoist writings and Zen paradoxes can so easily lead people
astray if they do not understand them properly. I shall never forgive myself if he is
going to start taking this sort of nonsense seriously and getting it fixed in his head. It
will all be because of that aria!’
She tore the paper into tiny pieces and gave them to one of the maids:
‘Here, burn this - straight away!’
Dai-yu laughed at her.
‘You needn’t have torn it up. If you will both come with me and wait while I put a
question to him, I can guarantee to drive this nonsense from his mind once and for
all.’
The three girls went round to Bao-yu’s room together.
‘Bao-yu,’ said Dai-yu, addressing him in a heavily mock-?serious manner, ‘I wish to
propound a question to you: “Bao” is that which is of all things the most precious and
“yu” is that which is of all things the most hard. Wherein lies your preciousness and
wherein lies your hardness?’
Bao-yu was unable to think of an answer. The girls all laughed and clapped their
hands.
‘Ha, ha, ha! He can’t reply. For a student of Zen he does seem remarkably obtuse!’
‘You say in your gāthā,’ Dai-yu continued,
‘ “... It would be best
Words unexpressed
To understand,
And on that ground
To take our stand.”

Now that’s all right as far as it goes, but it doesn’t go far enough. I should like to add
a few lines to it. Like this:

But, I perpend,
To have no ground
On which to stand
Were yet more sound.
And there’s an end!’


‘Ah, that’s better!’ said Bao-chai. ‘That sounds like a real “insight”. When the Sixth
Patriarch Hui-neng first came to Shao-zhou looking for a teacher, he heard that the
Fifth Patriarch Hong-ren was living at the monastery on Yellow?-plum Mountain, so
he found employment there in the monas?tery kitchen. When the Fifth Patriarch
wanted to choose a successor, he ordered each of the monks to compose a gāthā;
The Elder Shen-xiu recited this one:

    “Our body like the Bo-tree is,
    Our mind’s a mirror bright.
    Then keep it clean and free from dust,
    So it reflects the light!”

Hui-neng happened to be hulling rice in the kitchen at the time, and he shouted out,
“That’s not bad, but it’s still not quite right.” Then he recited this gāthāof his own:

    “No teal Bo-tree the body is,
    The mind no mirror bright.
    Since of the pair none’s really there,
    On what could dust alight?”

The Fifth Patriarch at once handed him his robe and bowl as a sign that he was to
succeed him. Your improvement on Cousin Bao’s gāthāis on very much the same lines,
Dai. There’s just one thing, though: what about that “koan” of yours he couldn’t
answer? Surely you’re not going to let him get away with it?’
‘Failure to answer means defeat,’ said Dai-yu. ‘In any case, if he were to answer
now, it would hardly count. The only condition I impose as victor is that he should
henceforth be forbidden to talk any more about Zen. You see,’ she told Bao-yu, ‘even
Bao-chai and I know more about it than you do. It’s too ridiculous that you should set
yourself up as a Zen authority!’
Bao-yu had in fact believed that he had attained an En?lightenment; but now
suddenly here was Dai-yu propounding koans he couldn’t answer and Bao-chai
quoting with easy familiarity from the Saying of the Patriarchs — though neither had
shown any evidence of these accomplishments in the past. It was clear that their
understanding of these matters was far in advance of his own. He consoled himself
with the reflection that if they, whose understanding was so superior, were
mani?festly still so far from Enlightenment, it was obviously a waste of time for him
to go on pursuing it. Having reached this comfortable conclusion, he accepted
Dai-yu’s condition with a laugh:
‘Who wants to be an authority on Zen? It was only a joke, any way!’

*

Just then it was announced that the Imperial Concubine had sent someone round
from the Palace with a lantern-riddle which they were to try and guess. After they
had guessed the answer, they were each to make up a riddle of their own and send it
back to her.
As soon as they heard this, the four of them hurried to the reception room in
Grandmother Jia’s apartment, where they found a young eunuch with a square,
flat-topped lantern of white gauze specially made for hanging riddles on. There was
one hanging on it already which they crowded round to read while the eunuch gave
them their instructions:
‘When the young ladies have guessed, will they please not tell anyone the answer,
but write it down secretly. The answers will be collected and taken back to the Palace
in a sealed en?velope so that Her Grace can see for herself who has guessed
correctly.’
Bao-chai went up to the lantern and looked at the riddle, which was in the form of a
quatrain. It was not a particularly ingenious one, but she felt obliged to praise it, and
therefore remarked that it was ‘hard to guess’ and pretended to have to think about
the answer, though in truth it had been obvious to her at a glance. Bao-yu, Dai-yu,
Xiang-yun and Tan-chun had also guessed the answer and were busy writing it down.
Presently Jia Huan and Jia Lan were summoned, and they too wrote something down
after a good deal of puzzling. After that everyone made up a riddle about some
object of their choice, wrote it out in the best kai-shu on a slip of paper, and hung it
on the lantern, which was then taken away by the eunuch.
Towards evening the eunuch returned and reported what the Imperial Concubine
had had to say about the results:
‘Her Grace’s own riddle was correctly guessed by everyone except Miss Ying and
Master Huan. Her Grace has thought of answers to all the riddles sent her by the
young ladies and gentlemen, but she does not know whether or not they are correct.’
He showed them the answers written down. Some were right and some were wrong,
but even those whose riddles had been incorrectly answered deemed it prudent to
pretend that the answers they had received were the right ones.
The eunuch proceeded to distribute prizes for answering the Imperial Concubine’s
riddle. Everyone who had guessed correctly received an ivory note-case made by
Palace craftsmen and a bamboo tea-whisk. Ying-chun and Jia Huan were the only
ones who did not receive anything. Ying-chun treated the matter as a joke and
rapidly dismissed it from her mind, but Jia Huan was very much put out. To make
matters worse, the eunuch went on to query Jia Huan’s own riddle:
‘Her Grace says that she has not answered Master Huan’s riddle because she could
not make any sense of it. She told me to bring it back and ask him what it means.’
Intrigued, the others crowded round to look. This is what Jia Huan had written:

         ‘Big brother with eight sits all day on the bed;
Little brother with two sits on the roof’s head.’.

There was a loud laugh when they had finished reading it. Jia Huan told the eunuch
the answer: a head-rest and a ridge-end. The eunuch made a note of it and, after
taking tea, departed once more.
Fired with enthusiasm by Yuan-chun’s example, old Lady Jia decided to hold a riddle
party. A very elegant lantern in the form of a three-leaved screen was hurriedly
constructed on her orders and set up in the hall. When that had been done, she told
all the boys and girls to make up a riddle - being careful to keep the answers to
themselves - write it on a slip of paper, and stick it on her lantern-screen. Then,
having pre?pared the best fragrant tea to drink, a variety of good things to eat, and
lots of little gifts to serve as prizes, she was ready to begin. Jia Zheng observed the
old lady’s excitement when he got back from Court and came along himself in the
evening to join in the fun.
There were three tables. Grandmother Jia, Jia Zheng, Bao-yu and Jia Huan sat at the
table on the kang, while below, Lady Wang, Bao-chai, Dai-yu and Xiang-yun sat at one
table and Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun at another. The floor below the kang was
thronged with old women and maids in attendance. Li Wan and Xi-feng had a table to
them?selves in an inner room.
‘Where’s my little Lan?’ said Jia Zheng, not seeing Jia Lan at any of the tables.
One of the serving-women went into the inner room to ask Li Wan. She rose to reply
out of respect for her father-in-law:
‘He refuses to come because he says his Grandpa Zheng hasn’t invited him.’
The others were much amused when the woman relayed this answer back to Jia
Zheng.
‘He’s a stubborn little chap when he’s made his mind up!’ they said. But they
thought none the worse of him for that.
Jia Zheng quickly sent Jia Huan with two of the old women to fetch him. When he
arrived, Grandmother Jia made him squeeze up beside her on her side of the table
and gave him a handful of nuts and dried fruits to eat. The little boy’s presence
provided the company with something to laugh and talk about. But not for long.
Bao-yu, who normally did most of the talking on occasions like this, was today
reduced by his father’s presence to saying no more than ‘yes’ and ‘no’ to remarks
made by other people. As for the rest: Xiang-yun, in spite of her sheltered upbringing,
was normally an animated, not to say indefatigable talker, but this evening she too
seemed to have been afflicted with dumbness by Jia Zheng’s presence; Dai-yu was at
the best of times unwilling to say very much in company from a sort of aristocratic
lethargy which was a part of her nature; and Bao-chai, whose punctilious correctness
made her always sparing in the use of words, even though on this occasion she was
probably the least uncomfortable of those present, said little to advance the
conversation. As a consequence, what should have been a jolly, intimate family party
was painfully unnatural and restrained.
Grandmother Jia knew as well as everyone else that this state of affairs was entirely
owing to Jia Zheng’s presence, and after the wine had gone round for the third time,
she attempted to drive him off to bed. Jia Zheng, for his part, was perfectly well
aware that he was being driven away so that the younger people could feel freer to
enjoy themselves and, smiling forcedly, appealed against his banishment:
‘When they told me earlier today that you were planning to give a riddle party, I
specially prepared a contribution to the feast so that I might come and join you. You
have so much affection for your grandchildren, Mama. Can you not spare just a tiny
bit for your son?’
Grandmother Jia laughed:
‘They can’t talk naturally while you are here. All you are doing is making it gloomy
for me. I can’t abide it. Well, if you’ve come to answer riddles, I’ll give you a riddle.
But if you can’t guess the answer, you will have to pay me a for?feit.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Jia Zheng eagerly. ‘And if I guess right, I shall expect to be given
a prize.’
‘Of course,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘The monkey’s tail reaches from tree-top to
ground. It’s the name of a fruit.’
Jia Zheng knew that the answer to this hoary old chestnut was ‘a longan’ (long ‘un),
but pretended not to, and made all kinds of absurd guesses, each time incurring the
obligation to pay his mother a forfeit, before finally giving the right answer and
receiving the old lady’s prize. Then he propounded a riddle of his own for her:


‘My body’s square,
Iron-hard am I.
I speak no word,
But words supply.


—It’s a useful object.’
He whispered the answer to Bao-yu, who, readily understand?ing what was expected
of him, surreptitiously passed it on to Grandmother Jia. The old lady, having thought
for a bit and decided that it sounded all right, said:
‘An inkstone.’
‘Bravo, Mamma! Right first time!’ said Jia Zheng, and turn?ing round to address the
servants, he asked them to bring in the presents for Lady Jia. There was an answering
call from the women below, and presently a number of them came for?ward bearing
trays and boxes of various shapes and sizes which they handed up onto the kang.
Grandmother Jia examined them one by one. They all contained traditional Lantern
Festival presents, but in new and exquisite designs and of the very highest quality.
The old lady was obviously pleased.
‘Come, children!’ she commanded jovially. ‘Give the Master a drink!’
Bao-yu stood up and poured wine from the wine-kettle into a little cup and Ying-chun
handed it ceremoniously to her uncle.
‘Have a look at the riddles on the screen,’ said Grandmother Jia when Jia Zheng,
with equal ceremony, had drained the cup. ‘They were all made up by the children.
See if you can tell me the answers.’
Jia Zheng rose from his seat and went up to the lantern-screen. The first riddle he
saw was Yuan-chun’s:

At my coming the devils turn pallid with wonder.
My body’s all folds and my voice is like thunder.
 When, alarmed by the sound of my thunderous crash,
       You look round, I have already turned into ash.
                               An object of amusement.


‘Would that be a firework?’ said Jia Zheng.
‘Yes,’ said Bao-yu.
Jia Zheng looked again, this time at Ying-chun’s:

         Man’s works and heaven’s laws I execute.
Without heaven’s laws, my workings bear no fruit.
Why am I agitated all day long?
For fear my calculations may be wrong.
A useful object.
          ‘An abacus?’
          There was a laugh from Ying-chun:
      ‘Yes.’
     The next riddle was Tan-chun’s:

In spring the little boys look up and stare
To see me ride so proudly in the air.
My strength all goes when once the bond is parted,
And on the wind I drift off broken-hearted.
An object of amusement.


‘It looks as if that ought to be a kite’, said Jia Zheng.
‘Yes,’ said Tan-chun.
The next riddle he looked at was Dai-yu’s:

At court levée my smoke is in your sleeve:
             Music and beds to other sorts I leave.
             With me, at dawn you need no watchman’s cry,
             At night no maid to bring a fresh supply.
             My head burns through the night and through the day,
             And year by year my heart consumes away.
The precious moments I would have you spare:
But come fair, foul, or fine, I do not care.
            A useful object.
‘That must be an incense-clock.’
Bao-yu answered for her:
‘Yes.’
   Jia Zheng looked at the next riddle:

Southward you stare,
He’ll northward glare.
Grieve, and he’s sad.
Laugh, and he’s glad.
A useful object.


‘Very good!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘If the answer is “a mirror”, it is a very good riddle.’
Bao-yu laughed:
‘That is the answer.’
‘Who is it by?’ said Jia Zheng. ‘There is no name on it.’
‘I expect that one is by Bao-yu,’ said Grandmother Jia.
Jia Zheng said nothing and passed on to the next one in silence. It was by Bao-chai:

    My ‘eyes’ cannot see and I’m hollow inside.
    When the lotuses surface, I’ll be by your side.
    When the autumn leaves fall I shall bid you adieu,
    For our marriage must end when the summer is through.
        A useful object.

Jia Zheng knew that the answer must be ‘a bamboo wife’, as they call those
wickerwork cylinders which are put between the bedclothes in summertime to make
them cooler; but a growing awareness that all the girls’ verses contained images of
grief and loss was by now so much affecting him that he felt quite unable to go on.
‘Enough is enough!’ he thought. ‘What can it be that makes these innocent young
creatures all produce language that is so tragic and inauspicious? It is almost as if
they were all destined to be unfortunate and short-lived and were un?consciously
foretelling their destiny.’
The gloom into which this reflection plunged him was evident in the melancholy
expression on his face and in his bowed and dejected stance. Grandmother Jia
noticed it but attributed it to fatigue. She feared that in this melancholy mood his
continued presence would place an even greater restraint on the young folk’s gaiety.
‘I think you really oughtn’t to stay,’ she said. ‘Why don’t you go and lie down? The
rest of us will sit up for a bit, but I don’t expect we shall go on very much longer.’
‘Yes,’ said Jia Zheng, roused from his reverie by her voice. ‘Yes, of course.’
But he forced himself to resume his former jovial manner and to drink another cup or
two of wine with her before finally retiring. Back in his own apartment, he became
lost in reverie once more; but whichever direction his thoughts took him in, he
remained melancholy and troubled.
Meanwhile the party he had just left was proceeding some?what differently.
‘Now, my dears, you can enjoy yourselves!’ Grandmother Jia said as soon as he had
left the room; and the words were no sooner out of her mouth than Bao-yu leaped
up from his seat and over to the screen and began criticizing the riddles on it - this
one had a line wrong here — that one’s words didn’t suit the subject — pointing with
his finger and capering about for all the world like a captive monkey that had just
been let off its chain.
‘Can’t we sit down and enjoy ourselves quietly, as we were doing just now,’ said
Dai-yu, ‘instead of all this prancing about?’
Xi-feng put in a word too, emerging from the inner room to say it:
‘You ought to have Uncle Zheng with you every day and never budge an inch from
his side!’ She turned to the others: ‘What a pity I didn’t think of it at the time: we
ought to have got Uncle to make him compose some more riddles for us. Then we
should have seen him sweat!’
Bao-yu was greatly exasperated by this remark and tried to seize hold of her. Xi-feng
tried to ward him off, and the result was that the two of them became locked in a
sort of playful wrestling-match.
Grandmother Jia continued for a while to laugh and joke with Li Wan and the girls,
but soon began to feel tired and sleepy. The night-drum was sounding, and when
they stopped to listen they found it was already the beginning of the fourth watch.
She ordered the food to be cleared away, telling the servants that they might have
what was left over for them?selves.
‘Time for bed, children!’ she said, rising to her feet. ‘We can do this again tomorrow,
if you like; but now we must have some sleep.’
With that the party gradually broke up and they all dis?persed to their rooms.
What happened thereafter will be told in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 23

Words from the ‘Western Chamber’ supply
a joke that offends
And songs from the ‘Soul’s Return’ move a
tender heart to anguish

Some time after her return from the Visitation the Imperial Concubine commissioned
Tan-chun to make her a copy of all the poems about Prospect Garden that had been
written during her visit, and having rearranged them in what she considered to be
their order of merit, further instructed that they should be engraved on stone in the
Prospect Garden itself — a lasting memorial to the precocious talent of her gifted
family. In pursuance of these instructions, Jia Zheng ordered his people to look out
the best craftsmen available to prepare and engrave the stone and delegated Cousin
Zhen to supervise the work with Jia Rong and Jia Qiang as his lieutenants. As Jia
Qiang proved to be fully occupied with his twelve young actresses — not to mention
their costumes, pro?perties and other paraphernalia — three other junior members
of the clan, Jia Chang, Jia Ling and Jia Ping, were called in to supervise the labour in
his stead. In due course the preliminary stages of waxing, scratching and ‘redding in’
had commenced, and work on the memorial proceeded according to plan. We pass
from this to other matters.
The twenty-four little Buddhist and Taoist nuns having now been moved out of the
two miniature temples in the garden, Jia Zheng had been thinking of dispersing them
among various temples and convents about the city, when a certain Zhou-shi, the
widow of a poor relation of the Rong-guo Jias who lived near by in North Dukes
Street, chanced to get wind of this matter and saw in it the possibility of some
employment.
Zhou-shi had for some time past been meaning to ask Jia Zheng if he would find her
boy Jia Qin a job — no matter how small a job as long as it would bring them in a
little income — and now, hearing this news about the nuns, she drove incontinent
forth to Xi-feng as fast as cab could carry her and besought her to use her influence
on the boy’s behalf.
Xi-feng had always found Zhou-shi a pleasant, unassuming sort of body and was
disposed to help her. Having agreed to do so, and having rehearsed her line of
approach, she went in to Lady Wang and broached the matter with her in the
follow?ing manner.
‘These little Buddhist and Taoist nuns,’ she said, ‘— we definitely ought not to send
them away. We shall need them again if Her Grace ever comes on another visit, and
it will be a terrible job getting them together again if they have all been dispersed. If
you ask me, the best thing would be to move them to the Temple of the Iron
Threshold where they would still be under our control. It would only be a question of
sending someone out there every month with a bit of money to pay for their
housekeeping; then if there is ever any question of needing them again, we have only
to say the word and they can be with us immediately without any trouble.’
The suggestion pleased Jia Zheng when it was in due course relayed to him by Lady
Wang.
‘Of course. That is just what we should do. I am glad you reminded me.’
From Jia Zheng a summons arrived for Jia Lian while he and Xi-feng were at dinner.
He laid down his chopsticks and rose to go, but Xi-feng put a hand out and detained
him:
‘Not so fast! Listen to me! If it’s anything else, never mind; but if it’s about those
little nuns...’ — and she went on to tell him exactly what he should say in that event
and to impress on him how important it was that he should say it.
Jia Lian smiled and shook his head:
‘Sorry, nothing doing! You’ll have to ask him yourself - if you think you know how
to!’
Xi-feng’s back stiffened. She laid down her chopsticks and looked at Jia Lian. There
was a glint in her eye and a dangerous little smile on her face when she spoke:
‘Do you mean that, or are you joking ?’
‘That boy of my cousin’s widow who lives in West Lane, Jia Yun, has been on at me
two or three times about getting him a job, and I promised to do something for him if
he would wait. Now here at last a job comes along and, as usual, you want to snap it
up yourself.’
‘Don’t worry!’ said Xi-feng consolingly. ‘Her Grace has mentioned that she wants a
lot of planting done - pines and cypresses - in the north-east section of the garden,
and she has also asked for more shrubs and flowers to be planted round the foot of
the main hall. I promise you that as soon as that job comes up your Jia Yun shall be
placed in charge of it.’
‘Oh well, in that case all right,’ said Jia Lian. ‘Just one thing, though’ — he dropped
his voice and smiled at her slily — ‘Why did you keep pushing me off like that last
night? I only wanted to try a change of position.’
A quick flush overspread Xi-feng’s face and she exploded in a little laugh. Then with a
‘pshaw!’ in his direction, she lowered her head again and went back to her meal.
Jia Lian laughed and slipped away. On entering Jia Zheng’s presence he found that
the subject was, as Xi-feng had antici?pated, the arrangements for accommodating
the little nuns, and he replied as Xi-feng had instructed him:
‘Jia Qin is a promising young fellow. I think he could be entrusted with the job. In
any case, he would be drawing the allowance from Accounts each month when all
the other pay?ments are made, so we should be able to keep an eye on him.’
Jia Zheng never took much interest in these trivial domestic matters and agreed
readily enough to Jia Lian’s suggestion. The latter returned to his apartment and
reported to Xi-feng. Xi-feng sent someone to inform Zhou-shi; and soon Jia Qin
himself had arrived and was pouring out his gratitude to the two benefactors. With a
show of conferring further favours, Xi-feng ‘begged’ Jia Lian to allow Jia Qin three
months’ payment in advance. A receipt was written for this amount and Jia Lian’s seal
affixed to it, and there and then Jia Qin was issued with a tally and sent to the
counting-house to collect the money.
When the three hundred taels of shining silver had been weighed and counted and
handed over, Jia Qin picked up a piece at random and tossed it to the cashiers to ‘buy
themselves a cup of tea with’. He had a boy to carry the money back home for him,
and after taking counsel with his mother he hired a stout little donkey for himself to
ride on and four or five covered mule-carts for the nuns, and conducting the carts
round to the side gate of the Rong-guo mansion, he called forth the twenty-four little
nuns and packed them all inside. Then off they set, with Jia Qin on his donkey at the
head of the procession, to the Temple of the Iron Threshold outside the city. And
there we leave them.

*

Yuan-chun’s editing of the Prospect Garden poems had given her a vivid recollection
of the garden’s beauties. She was sure that her father, out of a zealous reverence for
the Emperor and herself, would have kept it all locked and closed since her visit and
would have allowed no one else to enter, and she felt this to be a waste and a shame
— the more so when her family contained so many poetical young ladies who would
have found inspiration in its scenery — not to mention the benefit their presence
would have bestowed on the garden itself: for, as is well-known,

             When lovely woman smiles not,
             All Nature’s charms are dead.
Assuredly, the girls must be allowed into the garden. It should become their home.
And if the girls, why not Bao-yu? He had grown up in their midst. He was different
from other boys. If he were not allowed into the garden as well, he would consider
himself left out in the cold, and his distress would cause Lady Wang and
Grandmother Jia to feel unhappy too. Unquestionably she should ask for him to be
admitted along with the girls. Having reached this decision, she summoned the
eunuch Xia Bing-zhong and ordered him to convey the following Edict to Rong-guo
House:

Bao-chai and the other young ladies of the household are to reside in the Garden.
The Garden is not to be kept closed. Bao-yu is to accompany the young ladies into
the Garden and to continue his studies there.

The Edict was received by Jia Zheng and Lady Wang. When Xia Bing-zhong had gone,
they reported it at once to Grandmother Jia and sent servants into the garden to
sweep and prepare its buildings and rehang the blinds, portières and bed-curtains in
readiness for occupation.
No one was more excited by the prospect of this move than Bao-yu. He was
discussing it animatedly with Grandmother Jia (it was a discussion in which the words
‘I want’ recurred rather frequently) when suddenly a maid came in and an?nounced
that he was wanted by his father. At this bolt from the blue his countenance fell and
all his animation drained away. Clinging to his grandmother with the gluey
persistence of a toffee twist, he made it abundantly plain to her that he had no wish
to obey. The old lady did her best to comfort him:
‘There, there, my lamb! You’d better go and see him. Grannie will see to it that he
doesn’t hurt you. He wouldn’t dare. Besides, look at all those lovely poems you wrote:
I expect that’s why Her Grace is letting you inside the garden. I’m sure that’s all he
wants to see you about. Probably he just wants to warn you against getting up to
mischief after you have moved in. You only have to answer nicely and promise to do
as he says. You’ll be all right.’
To make sure, she sent a couple of old nannies along as well with strict instructions to
watch over him:
‘See that his Pa doesn’t frighten him!’ she told them, and the old women promised
their protection.
Obliged to go, yet still reluctant, Bao-yu contrived to do so at so dawdling a pace that
each step can have advanced him only a few inches upon his way. It so happened
that Jia Zheng had gone for the purpose of discussing these matters into Lady Wang’s
room and Lady Wang’s maids Golden, Suncloud, Sunset, Avis and Avocet were
standing outside under the eaves. Their amusement when they caught sight of
Bao-yu advancing at this snail’s pace into the courtyard was evident from the
expression on their faces. Golden seized him by the hand, and thrusting out a pair of
heavily carmined lips, she said to him in a whisper:
‘Look at that byootiful lipstick! I’ve only just put it on. Wouldn’t you like a taste of
it?’
Suncloud, with a suppressed giggle, pushed her off him:
‘Can’t you see how scared he is? It’s mean of you to tease him at a time like this!
He’s in a good mood,’ she said to Bao-yu. ‘You’d better go in straight away, while it
lasts!’
Bao-yu entered in a sort of sideways crouch, the picture of a submissive son - a
gesture that was wasted, however, since his father and mother were in the inner
room at the back. Aunt Zhao raised the inner room’s portière to admit him. He
bowed to her and entered. Jia Zheng and Lady Wang sat facing each other on the
kang talking. Ying-chun, Tan-chun, Xi-chun and Jia Huan were sitting on a row of
chairs below. Ying-chun remained seated at his entrance, but the other three rose to
their feet.
Jia Zheng glanced up and saw Bao-yu standing before him. The lively intelligence that
shone in the boy’s every feature, his almost breath-taking beauty of countenance
contrasted strikingly with Jia Huan’s cringing, hang-dog looks and loutish demeanour,
and Jia Zheng thought suddenly of his other son, Jia Zhu, his Firstborn, whom he had
lost. He glanced at Lady Wang. Of the children she had borne him Bao-yu was now
the only surviving son. He knew how much the boy meant to her. He thought of
himself, too: ageing now, his beard already grey. And as he thought, much of his
customary dislike of Bao-yu slipped away, so that for the time being perhaps only ten
or twenty per cent of it still remained. After what seemed to Bao-yu a very long time,
he said:
‘Her Grace has expressed a fear that by spending your time in constant amusement
outside you may become an idler and a dullard, and she has directed that you and
the girls should be moved into the garden so that you may be kept more closely at
your books. See to it that you work hard and diligently! If I detect any signs of your
former unruliness and disobedience, you will be in for trouble!’
Bao-yu assented meekly. Lady Wang took his hand and drew him up beside her on
the kang. Now that he was seated, Jia Huan and the other two sat down once more
in their chairs. Lady Wang stroked Bao-yu’s neck affectionately:
‘Have you finished those pills I sent you the other day yet?’
‘There’s still one left,’ said Bao-yu.
‘You must come for some more tomorrow. I’ll give you another ten. You must get
Aroma to give you one every night before you go to sleep.’
‘Yes. You told Aroma, Mother. She’s been giving me one every night, as you said.’
‘Who is this “Aroma”?’ asked Jia Zheng sharply.
‘A maid,’ said Lady Wang.
‘I suppose there are no limits to what a maid may be called,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘but
who would have picked an outlandish name like that to give her?’
Lady Wang could see that he was displeased and did her best to cover up for Bao-yu:
‘I think it was Lady Jia who gave her the name.’
‘Mother would never think of a name like that,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘It must have been
Bao-yu.’
Bao-yu saw that a frank avowal was now unavoidable and rose to his feet:
‘This maid has a surname which means “Flowers”. There is a line in an old poem I
happened to remember

The flowers’ aroma breathes of hotter days

and so I named her after that.’
‘When you get back you must change the name at once,’ said Lady Wang hurriedly
to Bao-yu. ‘Come, Sir Zheng’ - this to her husband - ‘you aren’t going to get angry
about a little thing like that?’
‘It doesn’t really matter,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘and there is no need for him to change the
name; but it demonstrates what I have always said about the boy: he is
fundamentally incapable of caring about serious matters and preoccupies himself
with poetic frivolities and other such airy-fairy nonsense as a substitute for solid
learning. Wretched fellow!’ he shouted at Bao-yu. ‘What are you waiting for?’
‘Go now, go now I’ said Lady Wang in a flutter. ‘Grandma is probably waiting to
begin her dinner.’
Bao-yu murmured a reply and retired, rather more slowly than was necessary.
Emerging from the outer door, he grinned and stuck his tongue out at Golden, then
shot off like a puff of smoke, the two old nannies hurrying after him. Arriving at the
entrance of the covered passage-way he came upon Aroma leaning in the doorway.
Her face lit up when she saw him returning unscathed and she asked him what his
father had wanted to see him about.
‘Oh, nothing much,’ said Bao-yu. ‘He just wanted to say a few words about not
getting up to mischief after we’ve moved into the garden.’
Having answered Aroma, he went in to see his grandmother and told her about the
interview. He found Dai-yu with her and asked her which part of the garden she
planned to live in. It appeared that she had just been considering this question
herself, for her answer was a prompt one:
‘I’ve been thinking how nice it would be in the Naiad’s House. I love all those
bamboos and the little winding, half-hidden walk. It is so quiet and peaceful there.’
Bao-yu clapped his hands delightedly:
‘Just what I would have chosen for you! I was hoping you would want to live there,
because I want to live in the House of Green Delights — which means that we should
be neigh?bours. And both places are quiet and tucked away.’
They were still discussing their plans when a servant arrived from Jia Zheng with a
message
for Grandmother Jia. It was to say that the twenty-second of the second month being
a Lucky Day was the date on which Bao-yu and the girls were to move into the
garden. Servants were to be allowed inside in the interim in order to make the rooms
ready for them. It was finally settled that Bao-chai should have All-spice Court, Dai-yu
the Naiad’s House, Ying-chun the building on Amaryllis Eyot, Tan-chun the Autumn
Studio, Xi-chun the Lotus Pavilion, Li Wan Sweet-rice Village, and Bao-yu the House
of Green Delights. Each set of rooms was allotted two old women and four maids in
addition to the occupant’s existing maids and nannies, and there were other servants
whose sole duty was sweeping and cleaning. On the twenty-second of the second
month everyone moved in. The silent, deserted garden suddenly came to life —
Live flowers on silk-embroidered flowers up-glanced,
And unguent scents the scents of spring enhanced
as the bevy of gaily-dressed, chattering girls spread themselves through its quiet
walks.



*
But to return to our hero.
Life for Bao-yu after his removal into the garden became utterly and completely
satisfying. Every day was spent in the company of his maids and cousins in the most
amiable and delightful occupations, such as
reading,
practising calligraphy,
strumming on the qin,
playing Go,
painting,
composing verses,
embroidering in coloured silks,
competitive flower-collecting,
making flower-sprays,
singing,
word games and
guess-fingers.
In a word, he was blissfully happy.
One product of this period was a set of four Garden Nights poems which, though
they have little claim to poetic merit, give a fairly accurate impression of the mood
and setting of those carefree days:

I. Spring

Behind silk hangings, in warm quilts cocooned,
His ears half doubt the frogs’ first muted sound.
Rain at his window strikes, the pillow’s cold;
Yet to the sleeper’s eyes spring dreams unfold.
Why does the candle shed its waxen tear?
Why on each flower do angry drops appear?
By uncouth din of giggling maids distressed
He burrows deeper in his silken nest.

II. Summer

A tired maid sleeps at her embroidery.
A parrot in its gilt cage calls for tea.
Pale moonbeams on an opened mirror fall,
And burning sandal makes a fragrant pall.
From amber cups thirst-quenching nectar flows.
A willow-breeze through crystal curtains blows.
In pool-side kiosks light-clad maidens flit,
Or, dressed for bed, by open casements sit.

III. Autumn

In Red Rue Study, far from worldly din,
Through rosy gauze moonlight comes flooding in.
Outside, a stork sleeps on moss-wrinkled rocks,
And dew from well-side trees the crow’s wings soaks.
A maid the great quilt’s golden bird has spread;
Her languid master droops his raven head.
Wine-parched and sleepless, in the still night he cries
For tea, and soon thick smoke and steam arise.

IV. Winter

Midnight and winter: plum with bamboo sleeps,
While one midst Indian rugs his vigil keeps.
Only a stork outside is to be found –
No orioles now, though white flowers mask the ground.
Chill strikes the maid’s bones through her garments fine;
Her fur-clad master’s somewhat worse for wine;
But, in tea-making mysteries deep-skilled,
She has with new-swept snow the kettle filled.

The indifferent quality of these poems did not prevent members of that class of
worldlings who see merit in a name and excellence in a title from copying them out
and proclaiming them everywhere as miracles of precocious talent when they
discovered that their author was the thirteen-year-old heir apparent of Sir Jia of
Rong-guo House. There were also a number of bright young things who professed an
extravagant liking for the deliciousness of the poems, and who copied them on to
fans and wall-spaces and recited them on the least provocation (or none at all) at
social gatherings. Soon Bao-yu was being besieged with requests for more poems, for
speci?mens of his calligraphy, for paintings, for inscriptions. He began to feel himself
a lion and was kept constantly busy with these dilettantish ‘duties’.
Then, quite suddenly, in the midst of this placid, agreeable existence, he was
discontented. He got up one day feeling out of sorts. Nothing he did brought any
relief. Whether he stayed indoors or went out into the garden, he remained bored
and miserable. The garden’s female population were mostly still in that age of
innocence when freedom from inhibition is the fruit of ignorance. Waking and
sleeping they surrounded him, and their mindless giggling was constantly in his ears.
How could they understand the restless feelings that now consumed him? In his
present mood of discontent he was bored with the garden and its inmates; yet his
attempts to find distraction outside it ended in the same emptiness and ennui.
Tealeaf saw how it was with him and racked his brains for a remedy. Unfortunately all
the things he could think of seemed to be things that Bao-yu had already tried and
grown tired of. But no, there was something he had not yet tried. As soon as Tealeaf
thought of it, he set off to the book-stalls and bought a pile of books — books of a
kind Bao-yu had never heard about - to give as a present to his young master. His
purchases included
Old Inklubber’s Stories Old and New
The Secret History of Flying Swallow
Sister of Flying Swallow
The Infamous Loves of Empress Wu
The Jade Ring Concubine, or Peeps in the Inner Palace
and a heap of playbooks — mostly romantic comedies and the like.
Bao-yu took one look at this gift and was enraptured; but Tealeaf uttered a warning:
‘Don’t take these into the garden! If you do, and anyone finds out about them, I’ll
be in real trouble — more than just a bellyful!’
The injunction was one with which Bao-yu was most un?willing to comply. After a
good deal of hesitation he picked out a few of the chaster volumes to keep by his bed
and read when no one was about, and left the cruder, more forthright ones behind,
hidden somewhere in his outer study.
One day after lunch — it was round about the Midwash of the third month, as our
forefathers, who measured the passage of time by their infrequent ablutions, were
wont to say - Bao-yu set off for Drenched Blossoms Weir with the volumes of
Western Chamber under his arm, and sitting down on a rock underneath the
peach-tree which grew there beside the bridge, he took up the first volume and
began, very attentively, to read the play. He had just reached the line

The red flowers in their hosts are falling

when a little gust of wind blew over and a shower of petals suddenly rained down
from the tree above, covering his clothes, his book and all the ground about him. He
did not like to shake them off for fear they got trodden underfoot, so collecting as
many of them as he could in the lap of his gown, he carried them to the water’s edge
and shook them in. The petals bobbed and circled for a while on the surface of the
water before finally disappearing over the weir. When he got back he found that a lot
more of them had fallen while he was away. As he hesitated, a voice behind him said,
‘What are you doing here?’
He looked round and saw that it was Dai-yu. She was carrying a garden hoe with a
muslin bag hanging from the end of it on her shoulder and a garden broom in her
hand.
‘You’ve come just at the right moment,’ said Bao-yu, smiling at her. ‘Here, sweep
these petals up and tip them in the water for me! I’ve just tipped one lot in myself.’
‘It isn’t a good idea to tip them in the water,’ said Dai-yu. ‘The water you see here is
clean, but farther on beyond the weir, where it flows past people’s houses, there are
all sorts of muck and impurity, and in the end they get spoiled just the same. In that
corner over there I’ve got a grave for the flowers, and what I’m doing now is
sweeping them up and putting them in this silk bag to bury them there, so that they
can gradu?ally turn back into earth. Isn’t that a cleaner way of disposing of them?’
Bao-yu was full of admiration for this idea.
‘Just let me put this book somewhere and I’ll give you a hand.’
‘What book?’ said Dai-yu.
‘Oh... The Doctrine of the Mean and The Greater Learning,’ he said, hastily
concealing it.
‘Don’t try to fool me!’ said Dai-yu. ‘You would have done much better to let me
look at it in the first place, instead of hiding it so guiltily.’
‘In your case, coz, I have nothing to be afraid of,’ said Bao-yu; ‘but if I do let you
look, you must promise not to tell anyone. It’s marvellous stuff. Once you start
reading it, you’ll even stop wanting to eat!’
He handed the book to her, and Dai-yu put down her things and looked. The more
she read, the more she liked it, and before very long she had read several acts. She
felt the power of the words and their lingering fragrance. Long after she had finished
reading, when she had laid down the book and was sitting there rapt and silent, the
lines continued to ring on in her head.
‘Well,’ said Bao-yu, ‘is it good?’
Dai-yu smiled and nodded.
Bao-yu laughed:


‘How can I, full of sickness and of woe,
Withstand that face which kingdoms could o’erthrow?’

Dai-yu reddened to the tips of her ears. The eyebrows that seemed to frown yet
somehow didn’t were raised now in anger and the lovely eyes flashed. There was
rage in her crimson cheeks and resentment in all her looks.
‘You’re hateful!’ - she pointed a finger at him in angry accusal — ‘deliberately using
that horrid play to take advantage of me. I’m going straight off to tell Uncle and
Aunt!’
At the words ‘take advantage of me’ her eyes filled with tears, and as she finished
speaking she turned from him and began to go. Bao-yu rushed after her and held her
back:
‘Please, please forgive me! Dearest coz! If I had the slightest intention of taking
advantage of you, may I fall into the water and be eaten up by an old bald-headed
turtle! When you have become a great lady and gone at last to your final
resting-place, I shall become the stone turtle that stands in front of your grave and
spend the rest of eternity carrying your tombstone on my back as a punishment!’
His ridiculous declamation provoked a sudden explosion of mirth. She laughed and
simultaneously wiped the tears away with her knuckles:
‘Look at you - the same as ever! Scared as anything, but you still have to go on
talking nonsense. Well, I know you now for what you are:


“Of silver spear the leaden counterfeit”!’

‘Well! You can talk!’ said Bao-yu laughing. ‘Listen to you! Now I’m going off to tell
on you!’
‘You needn’t imagine you’re the only one with a good memory,’ said Dai-yu
haughtily. ‘I suppose I’m allowed to remember lines too if I like.’
Bao-yu took back the book from her with a good-natured laugh:
‘Never mind about all that now! Let’s get on with this flower-burying!’
And the two of them set about sweeping together the fallen flower-petals and
putting them into the bag. They had just finished burying it when Aroma came
hurrying up to them:
‘So there you are! I’ve been looking for you everywhere. Your Uncle She isn’t well
and the young ladies have all gone over to visit him. Her Old Ladyship says you are to
go as well. You’d better come back straight away and get changed!’
Bao-yu picked up his book, took leave of Dai-yu, and ac?companied Aroma back to
his room.
And there, for the moment, we shall leave him.

*
With Bao-yu gone and the girls evidently all out, Dai-yu began to feel lonely and
depressed. She was on her way back to her own room and was just passing by the
corner of Pear Tree Court when she heard the languorous meanderings of a flute and
the sweet modulation of a girlish voice coming from the other side of the wall, and
knew that the twelve little actresses were at their rehearsal inside. Although she was
paying no particular attention to the singing, a snatch of it chanced suddenly to fall
with very great clarity on her ear, so that she was able to make out quite distinctly
the words of two whole lines of the aria being sung:


‘Here multiflorate splendour blooms forlorn
Midst broken fountains, mouldering walls –’

They moved her strangely, and she stopped to listen. The voice went on:


‘And the bright air, the brilliant morn
Feed my despair.
Joy and gladness have withdrawn
To other gardens, other halls -’

At this point the listener unconsciously nodded her head and sighed.
‘It’s true,’ she thought, ‘there is good poetry even in plays. What a pity most people
think of them only as entertainment. A lot of the real beauty in them must go
unappreciated.’
She suddenly became aware that her mind was wandering and regretted that her
inattention had caused her to miss some of the singing. She listened again. This time
it was another voice:


‘Because for you, my flowerlike fair,
The swift years like the waters flow—’

The words moved her to the depth of her being.


‘I have sought you everywhere,
And at last I find you here,
In a dark room full of woe—’

It was like intoxication, a sort of delirium. Her legs would no longer support her. She
collapsed on to a near-by rockery and crouched there, the words turning over and
over in her mind:

Because for you, my flowerlike fair,
The swift years like the waters flow …

Suddenly she thought of a line from an old poem she had read quite recently:

Relentlessly the waters flow, the flowers fade.

From that her mind turned to those famous lines written in his captivity by the tragic
poet-emperor of Later Tang:

The blossoms fall, the water flows,
The glory of the spring is gone
In nature’s world as in the human one —

and to some lines from The Western Chamber which she had just been reading:

As flowers fall and the flowing stream runs red,
A thousand sickly fancies crowd the mind.

All these different lines and verses combined into a single overpowering impression,
riving her soul with a pang of such keen anguish that the tears started from her eyes.
She might have remained there indefinitely, weeping and comfortless, had not
someone just at that moment come up behind her and tapped her on the shoulder.
She turned to look and saw that it was—
But if you wish to know who it was, you must read the next chapter!
CHAPTER 24

The Drunken Diamond shows nobility of character
in handling his money
And the Quiet-voiced Girl provides material for
fantasy by losing her handkerchief

As Dai-yu continued to crouch there, a prisoner of her own sorrowful thoughts and
emotions, someone suddenly came up behind her and tapped her on the shoulder:
‘What are you doing here all on your own?’
She looked round with a start. It was Caltrop.
‘You silly girl!’ said Dai-yu. ‘You gave me quite a shock, creeping up on me like that.
Where have you just come from?’
Caltrop laughed mischievously:
‘I’ve been looking for our young lady, but I can’t find her anywhere. Your
Nightingale is looking for you too, by the way. She says Mrs Lian has sent you - I think
it’s some kind of tea. Shall I go with you?’
She took her by the hand and accompanied her back to the Naiad’s House. The
present from Xi-feng she had mentioned was waiting there when they arrived: two
little cylindrical containers of a new tea supplied to the Palace for the Emperor’s own
use. The two girls sat down and discussed the relative merits of various pieces of
embroidery, played a little Go, and looked at one or two books. Then Caltrop went off
again.
Our narrative leaves them at this point and passes to other matters.

*

Recalled to his own apartment by Aroma, Bao1u arrived back to find his
grandmother’s maid Faithful reclining on the couch examining Aroma’s needlework.
‘Where have you been?’ she said, as soon as she saw him enter. ‘Her Old Ladyship
is waiting for you. She wants you to go next door to see how your Uncle She is
getting on. You’d better hurry up and get changed!’
Aroma went into the next room to get his clothes. Bao-yu sat on the edge of the
couch and kicked his shoes off. While he was waiting for his boots to come, he turned
and scrutinized Faithful. She was wearing a pale strawberry-coloured dress of silk
damask, a sleeveless black satin jacket, stockings of eggshell blue, and dark-red
embroidered slippers. Her neck, which was towards him as she bent down once more
to inspect the needlework, was encircled at its base by a reddish-purple silk scarf. A
fascinating neck. He bent down over it to sniff its perfume and stroked it softly with
his hand. It was as smooth and white as Aroma’s. With an impish chuckle he threw
himself upon her and clung like sticky toffee about her person:
‘Come on, Faithful darling, give us a taste of your lipstick!’
Faithful called out to Aroma in the next room:
‘Aroma, come in and look at this! All the years you’ve been with him now —
haven’t you managed to cure him yet?’
Aroma came in with her arms full of clothes.
‘I don’t know what’s the matter with you,’ she said to Bao-?yu. ‘Heaven knows, I’ve
tried hard enough to cure you! If you go on much longer like this, you’re just going to
make it impossible to go on living here any longer.’
She hurried him on with his dressing. When he was ready, he accompanied Faithful to
the front apartment to see Grandmother Jia. Going outside again, he found horse
and servants ready waiting and was about to get into the saddle, when he noticed Jia
Lian dismounting opposite, having just returned from his visit. The two cousins went
up to each other and exchanged a few words. Just at that moment a figure emerged
from the side of the courtyard and greeted Bao-yu:
‘Uncle Bao! How are you?’
Bao-yu turned. It was a tall, thin youth of eighteen or nineteen who had spoken, with
a thin, handsome face and an air of great natural refinement. Although his face was
familiar, Bao-yu could not for the moment remember his name or which part of the
clan he belonged to.
‘You look very puzzled!’ said Jia Lian amusedly. ‘Surely you know who this is? This is
Jia Yun - Cousin Bu-shi’s boy, who lives in West Lane.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I can’t think what made me forget! — How’s your
mother?’ he asked Jia Yun. ‘What business brings you here today?’
Jia Yun pointed to Jia Lian:
‘I came here to have a word with Uncle Lian.’
‘You’ve grown very good-looking since I saw you last,’ said Bao-yu with a grin. ‘You
could almost be my son.’
‘You’ve got a nerve!’ said Jia Lian laughing. ‘Your son? He’s five or six years older
than you.’
‘How old are you then?’ Bao-yu asked him.
‘Eighteen.’
Being a sharp-witted young man who knew how to make the most of an opportunity,
Jia Yun was quick to turn Bao?-yu’s jest to good account.
‘There’s a saying about “grandsires in cradles and babbies with beards”, you know;
and even if I am older than you, “the highest mountain can’t shut out the sun”! I’ve
had no one to care for me during these last few years since my father died, and if you
don’t mind having so stupid a person for your son, I should certainty be very happy
to have you for a father.’
‘You hear that?’ said Jia Lian. ‘Now you’ve got yourself a son! You’ll find that
parenthood is no laughing matter, I can tell you!’
He left them and went inside, chuckling to himself.
Bao-yu smiled at his new ‘son’:
‘Next time you’re free, come and see me. Don’t waste your time trying to join in
their little intrigues! I’m afraid I’m not free at the moment, but if you will come round
to my study tomorrow, we can spend all day together, and I shall be able to show you
round the garden.’
With these words he mounted his horse and set off, his pages at his back, for Jia
She’s.
Bao-yu found that his uncle was suffering from nothing more serious than a chill. He
delivered his grandmother’s message first and then asked after his uncle on his own
behalf. Jia She stood up to hear what his mother had to say, and when Bao-yu had
finished, ordered a servant to take him to his Aunt Xing’s room. Bao-yu withdrew and
followed the servant through the back and across the courtyard to the main
reception room. Seeing him enter, Lady Xing rose to her feet to ask after
Grandmother Jia, then sat down again to be asked after in turn by Bao-yu. Then she
drew him up to sit beside her on the kang and asked him about the others, at the
same time giving orders for tea to be served.
While they were still sipping the tea, little Jia Cong, the son of one of Jia She’s
concubines, came in to say ‘hullo’ to his Cousin Bao.
‘Where did this little ragamuffin come from?’ Lady Xing scolded. ‘I don’t know what
that Nannie of yours can be thinking of to let you get in such a state! I declare, your
face is as black as a crow! No one would ever think to look at you that you were an
educated little boy and came from a good family!’
While she scolded, Jia Huan and Jia Lan arrived, their duty call on Jia She evidently
just completed. Lady Xing made them sit on chairs below the kang. Seeing Bao-yu up
on the kang with Lady Xing and sharing her cushion, and observing how she fondled
and petted him, Jia Huan soon began to feel uncomfortable and made a sign to Jia
Lan indi?cating that they should go. As Jia Huan was his uncle, Jia Lan had to do as he
said, so the little boy and the big one rose together to take their leave. Bao-yu said
he would go with them, but Lady Xing stopped him with a gracious smile:
‘You sit where you are! I’ve got something else to say to you.’
He was obliged to stay. Lady Xing turned to the other two:
‘When you get back, do each of you give my regards to your mothers. I won’t ask
you to stay to dinner because I’ve already got the girls here and they are making so
much rumpus that it’s given me a headache.’
Jia Huan and Jia Lan promised to convey her greetings and went out.
‘Where are the girls, then?’ Bao-yu asked after they had gone. ‘I haven’t seen
them.’
‘Oh, I don’t know,’ said Lady Xing nonchalantly. ‘They only sat here for a few
moments, then they went round to the back. They’re round the back somewhere or
other.’
‘You said there was something you wanted to talk to me about, Aunt. What was it
you wanted to tell me?’
‘Oh, nothing at all!’ said Lady Xing gaily. ‘I only said that because I wanted you to
stay and have dinner here with me and the girls. And I’ve got something nice for you
to take back with you afterwards.’
Bao-yu and his aunt chatted away, and before long it was time for dinner and the
three girls were called in. A table and chairs were arranged, the table was laid, and
Lady Xing, her daughter Ying-chun, her two nieces and her nephew sat down to their
meal. When it was over, Bao-yu went in to take his leave of Jia She, after which he
and the girls returned to their own side of the mansion. There they first went in to
see Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang and then returned to their own apartments for
the night.
So much for Bao-yu and the girls.
Let us return to Jia Yun who, after his encounter with Bao-?yu, had gone in to see Jia
Lian and ask him if there was any prospect of a job.
‘A job turned up only the other day,’ said Jia Lian, ‘but unfortunately your Aunt
Feng was very anxious that I should give it to Jia Qin and I’m afraid I let him have it.
However, she did mention that there will soon be a lot of planting to do in the garden,
and she promised that as soon as that work turns up we shall definitely hand it over
to you.’
Jia Yun was silent for some moments, then he said:
‘All right. I’ll just have to go on waiting, then. But would you mind not mentioning
this visit to Auntie? I can tell her about it myself, if need be, next time I see her.’
‘I shan’t mention it,’ said Jia Lian. ‘I’ve got better things to do with my time than go
running after her to talk about things like this! Tomorrow I have to go to Xing-yi, by
the way. I have to get back on the same day — but perhaps you’d better wait until
the day after tomorrow before coming round again. In fact, you’d better wait until
the evening of the day after tomorrow - some time after the beginning of the first
watch. Any time before that I shall be busy.’
He terminated the interview by going into the inner room to change his clothes.
Jia Yun went out of the Rong-guo mansion and set off for home, ruminating as he
went. A plan at last formed in his mind. Instead of returning home, he struck off for
the house of his maternal uncle.
His uncle’s name was Bu Shi-ren. He was the proprietor of a perfumery, and when Jia
Yun arrived had only just got back from the shop. Seeing his nephew enter, he asked
him what he had come about.
‘I’m on to something which needs your help,’ said Jia Yun. ‘Please Uncle, could you
possibly let me have four ounces of Barus camphor and four ounces of musk on
credit? I promise faithfully that you shall have the money by Autumn Quarter-day.’
Bu Shi-ren ‘humph-ed’ scornfully:
‘Don’t talk to me about credit! A while ago we let one of the assistants have several
taels’ worth of goods on credit for one of his relations, and we haven’t seen the
money for it yet. We had to share the loss between us. We’ve got a written
agreement now that in future if any of us gives credit to a friend or relation, he is
liable to a fine of twenty taels of silver to be shared out among the rest.
‘In any case, we’re short of stock on those two items. I doubt we’ve got that much
in the shop, even if you could pay cash down for it. We’d have to try to raise it for you
else?where.
‘And for another thing: what do you want it for, anyway? I don’t expect it’s for any
serious purpose. Even if I let you have it on credit, I expect it would only get thrown
away on some foolishness or other.
‘And don’t you go saying that your Uncle’s always on at you when you come to see
him! You young people just don’t know what’s good for you. If only you could pull
yourself together and earn a bit of money, no one would be happier for you than I
should.’
Jia Yun smiled:
‘What you say is no doubt perfectly true, Uncle. But when Father died I was too
little to understand what was going on, and according to what Mother has since told
me, it was you who stepped in and took care of everything. Now you know as well as
I do that it wasn’t I who spent all the money that came from selling off our little bit of
property, and I don’t see what I am supposed to do without any capital. Even the
cleverest housewife can’t make bread without flour! You’re lucky you’ve only got me
to contend with. Anyone else in my position would be pestering the life out of you.
They’d be round here scrounging all the time: a pound of rice one day, a quart of
beans the next. Then you would have something to grumble about!’
‘My dear boy,’ said Bu Shi-ren, ‘if I had it to give, you should have it and welcome!
Your trouble is, though, as I’m always telling your Aunt, you won’t think ahead. If only
you’d pull yourself together and go and have a word with your Father’s folk at the big
house - or if you can’t get to see them, put your pride in your pocket and make
yourself agreeable to some of the stewards there — get yourself a job of some kind!
When I was on my way out of the city the other day, I ran into that cousin of yours
from North Street riding on a donkey with four or five carriages behind him and fifty
or sixty nuns on his way to your family temple out in the country. Now that’s a
shrewd young fellow! You can’t tell me he got that job by doing nothing!’
Exasperated by his uncle’s nagging, Jia Yun got up to go. ‘What’s the hurry?’ said Bu
Shi-ren. ‘You can have something to eat before you go -’
‘Are you crazy?’ his wife’s voice cut in from the kitchen. ‘I told you we haven’t got
any rice in the house. I’ve just bought this half a pound of noodles that I’m cooking
for you now. I don’t know what you’re acting so lordly about, asking people to dinner.
The boy’ll only go hungry if he stays!’
‘Buy another half a pound, woman, and put it in with the rest!’ said Bu Shi-ren.
‘Goldie!’ Mrs Bu shouted to her daughter. ‘Go over to Mrs Wang’s house across the
road and ask if she can lend us a few cash. Tell her we can pay her back tomorrow!’
But before she had finished, Jia Yun, with a muttered ‘Don’t bother!’ had slipped
quietly away.
Angrily leaving his uncle’s house behind him, he was on his way back home, eyes
fixed on the ground as he brooded miserably on his affairs, when he walked head-on
into drunkard. The man seized hold of him with a curse:
‘You sodding blind, bumping into me like that?’
The voice was a familiar one. Looking closer he saw that it was his neighbour Ni Er, a
racketeer who made most of his money from high-interest loans supplemented by
what he took off other players in the gambling dens. He drank too much and was
always getting into fights. At this particular moment he was on his way back from
paying a little ‘call’ on one of his debtors — evidently a lucrative one, for he was
already half-seas-over. He did not take kindly to being bumped into, and it would
have gone badly with Jia Yun if he had not immediately identified himself:
‘Ni, old chap, don’t strike! It’s me! I wasn’t looking where I was going.’
Hearing the voice, Ni Er opened his bleary eyes a little wider, saw that it was Jia Yun,
released him - lurching heavily as he did so — and gave a crapulous laugh:
‘Oh,’ he said, ‘young Mist’ Jia. Parm me. Wherra you jus’ come from?’
‘Don’t ask me!’ said Jia Yun bitterly. ‘I’ve just been given the bird!’
‘Nemmind!’ said Ni Er. ‘Anyone been bothering you, Mist’ Jia, jus’ tell me and I’ll
settle accounts with him for you! You know me. Ni Er. The Drunken Diamond. Old
Dime’ll look after you. Anyone this part of the town troubling neighbour of Dime’s,
don’t care who he is, guarantee put him out of business.’
‘Look, Diamond, if you’ll promise not to get angry, I’ll tell you what happened,’ said
Jia Yun, and proceeded to give him an account of his interview with Bu Shi-ren. Ni Er
was hugely incensed:
‘Damn fella! Give the damn fella piece of my mind if he wasn’t a relation of yours.
Make my blood boil. Damn fella! Nemmind. Dome be downhearted. Got a few taels
of silver here. If you can use it, help yourself! Good neighbour of Dime’s. Here y’are.
Interest-free loan.’
‘This man’s a racketeer,’ Jia Yun thought to himself, ‘but he’s been known to do a
good turn before now — in fact, he’s got quite a reputation in some quarters as a
champion of the poor. If I don’t accept his offer, he may turn nasty and I shall be in
trouble. Better accept the money and pay back double the amount when I can.’
Having made the decision, he thanked Ni Er with a smile:
‘You’re a real sport, Diamond! Since you’ve been kind enough to make the offer
then, I won’t refuse. I’ll make you out a proper IOU for it when I get home.’
Ni Er roared with laughter:
‘There’s only fifteen taels and six pennyweights of silver here. If you’re going to go
writing IOUs, I won’t lend it to you!’
Jia Yun laughed too and took the money from him:
‘All right, Diamond, anything you say! Let’s not fall out about it!’
‘That’s more like it!’ said Ni Er. ‘Getting dark now. Won’t keep you for a drink. Still
got a little business to do. You go on home. Like you to give a message to my old
woman, be so kind. Not going home tonight. If there’s anything to tell me about, she
can send my daughter round first thing tomorrow. Find me at Bandy Wang, the
horse-dealer’s.’
With these words he went on his way, lurching horribly.
The encounter left Jia Yun somewhat bemused.
‘That Ni Er’s certainly a character!’ he thought. ‘The trouble is, it may only have
been the drink that made him generous. Perhaps when he’s sobered up tomorrow
he’ll want his money back with a hundred per cent interest. What am I going to do
then?’
Then he suddenly remembered what the money would enable him to do:
‘Of course! It doesn’t matter! If I get the job, I can pay back the loan and a hundred
per cent interest easily.’
With that thought uppermost in his mind he went into a money-changer’s to have
the silver weighed. To his great delight it turned out to be exactly the amount Ni Er
had said, not a pennyweight less. Then he went home, calling at Ni Er’s house on the
way to give the message to his wife. En?tering his own house he found his mother on
the kang spin?ning. She looked up as he entered:
‘Where have you been all day?’
He did not like to mention that he had been to see her brother in case she was angry.
He only said:
‘Been at Rong-guo House waiting for Uncle Lian. Have you had supper yet?’
‘Yes, I’ve had mine. I put something aside for you.’
She called to their little slavey to fetch it for him. Except for her work-lamp it was
already dark indoors, so after finishing his supper he got himself ready for the night,
unrolled his bedding, and settled down to sleep.
Rising early next morning, he went off as soon as he had washed to the shops in
Central Street outside the south gate of the Inner City and bought camphor and musk
at a perfu?mer’s. From there he went to Rong-guo House, and having first
ascertained at the gate that Jia Lian was out for the day, he made his way to the
Lians’ apartment at the back. Outside the gateway leading to their courtyard a
number of page boys were sweeping the ground with long-handled brooms.
Sud?denly Zhou Rui’s wife came out and addressed them:
‘Stop sweeping now! The Mistress is coming.’
Jia Yun hurried up to her with a smile of greeting:
‘Where is Aunt Lian off to, then?’
‘Her Old Ladyship wants her,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘I think it’s to see about some
tailoring.’
As she spoke, the subject of his inquiry emerged from the gateway, surrounded by a
bevy of attendants. Jia Yun was well aware that she had a weakness for flattery and
the showier forms of deference. Bringing his hands together in an exag?gerated
salute and stepping briskly forward, he made her a tremendous bow and wished her
in good health.
Xi-feng continued to walk on and, without actually looking at him or turning her head,
inquired after his mother’s health and asked why she never came to visit.
‘She’s not been very well, Auntie. She’s always thinking about you and meaning to
pay a call, but when it’s come to it, she just hasn’t been able to get out.’
‘You’re a wonderful liar!’ said Xi-feng with a laugh. ‘I don’t suppose she’s ever
thought about me until this moment!’
‘I’m too much afraid of lightning to lie to my superiors,’ said Jia Yun. ‘Mother was
talking about you only last night, as a matter of fact. She said, “Your Auntie Lian is
only a single weak woman, yet she has all those responsibilities. It’s a good thing she
has the will-power to keep everything running so smoothly, because if that should go,
she’d be worn out in no tine.”‘
Xi-feng was now all smiles, and halted in spite of herself to hear more.
‘And why should you and your mother be chewing over my affairs behind my back,
pray?’
‘That’s a long story,’ said Jia Yun. ‘A very good friend of mine who runs a perfumery
and had quite a bit put by in savings decided to invest his money in a government
post and bought himself the place of an Assistant Sub-Prefect. Well, a few days ago
his posting came and it turns out to be for somewhere down in Yunnan. He’s taking
his family with him, so of course he won’t be able to keep on the shop, and he’s been
going over all his stock deciding what to give away and what to put in his clearance
sale. He decided to give the more valuable stuff to friends and relations. My share
was a whole quarter of a pound of Borneo camphor and another quarter of musk,
and I was discussing with Mother last night what we ought to do with it. We don’t
know anyone who could afford to buy it; and it seems a shame to sell it at less than
the price; and even if we gave it away, we couldn’t think of anyone who would want
so much. But then I suddenly thought of you and the packets of money you’ve spent
on this kind of thing in years past, and I thought to myself that this year, what with
Her Grace in the Palace and the Double Fifth already not far off, you’re sure to be
using ten or twelve times the usual amount. So, to cut a long story short, we decided
to make a present of it to you. There you are, Auntie - a little token of my esteem!’
As he spoke, he took out a small brocade-covered box and respectfully raised it in
both hands to offer her.
Now Xi-feng was just beginning to think about the problem of purchasing aromatics
for the Double Fifth festival, and it pleased her very much to be relieved of the
trouble of doing so — especially when it was in so agreeable a manner. She smiled at
him graciously before turning to her maid:
‘Felicity, take my nephew’s present and give it to Patience to take care of!’
The smile was directed once more on Jia Yun:
‘You are very thoughtful. I’m not surprised your Uncle speaks so highly of you. He’s
often told me what a well-spoken, sensible young man you are.’
They seemed to be sailing into harbour. Jia Yun took a step closer:
‘Has Uncle been talking to you about me then?’ — The tone in which he asked the
question was deliberately meaningful.
Xi-feng was on the point of telling him that he would get the tree-planting job when
she reflected that by doing so she would be cheapening herself in his estimation. He
would almost certainly suppose that she was promising it in return for the perfume.
In replying to his question she therefore confined herself to a few insipid civilities,
avoiding all mention of jobs and trees, and presently continued on her way to
Grandmother Jia’s.
Obviously Jia Yun was in no position to raise the subject if his aunt was not willing, so
he was obliged to return in the same uncertainty in which he had come. Back home
he remembered Bao-yu’s invitation of the previous day, and as soon as he had
finished his meal, he returned once more to Rong-guo House and made his way to
Sunset Studio outside the gateway leading to Lady Jia’s quarters. He found the pages
Tealeaf and Ploughboy sitting over a game of chess and arguing about a piece that
one of them had just taken. Other pages — Trickles, Sweeper, Cloudy and Storky —
were up on the roof looking for fledgelings. Jia Yun entered the court?yard and
stamped his foot:
‘Come on, you young rapscallions! Can’t you see you’ve got a visitor?’
The pages, except Tealeaf, melted away. Jia Yun went into the study and sat down in a
chair.
‘Has Master Bao been here yet?’
‘He hasn’t been here yet today,’ said Tealeaf. ‘If you want to talk to him, I’ll have a
look and see if he’s about.’
With that he, too, vanished.
For about the time it would take to eat a meal, Jia Yun gazed at the paintings,
calligraphic scrolls and antiques which adorned the room. At the end of that time, as
there was still no sign of Tealeaf, he took a look outside to see if there were any other
pages whom he could ask to take a message; but they had all gone off to play
elsewhere. Dejectedly he went back once more to wait.
‘Tealeaf!’
A soft and thrilling voice was calling from outside. Craning out to look he saw a
fifteen-or sixteen-year-old maid standing near the entrance to the study. She was a
neat, pleasant-looking girl with a pair of limpid, intelligent eyes. Seeing a strange man
in the room, she quickly shrank back out of his line of vision. At that very moment
Tealeaf walked back into the courtyard.
‘Ah, good!’ he said, catching sight of the maid. ‘I was beginning to wonder how I’d
ever get a message to him.’
Jia Yun ran out to question him:
‘Well?’
‘Waited for ages,’ said Tealeaf, ‘but no one came by. She’s from his room, though.’ -
he indicated the soft-voiced maid – ‘Listen, dear,’ he said addressing her. ‘Can you
take a message for us? Tell him that Mr Jia from West Lane is here.’
On learning that the visitor was a member of the clan, the maid became less
concerned about concealment and engaged the limpid eyes in bolder scrutiny of his
features. The object of her scrutiny now addressed her:
‘Don’t bother about the “West Lane” stuff! Just say that “Yun” has called!’
The girl reflected for some moments, then, with a half-smile, she said:
‘If I were you, Mr Jia, I’d go home now and come again tomorrow. I’ll try to get a
message through to him this evening if I get the chance.’
‘What’s the idea?’ said Tealeaf.
‘He didn’t have his nap today,’ said the maid. ‘That means he’ll be having dinner
early. Then suppose he doesn’t go out after dinner: are you going to let Mr Jia wait
here all day without eating? It would be much better if he went home now and came
again tomorrow. Even if I succeed in getting word through to him as soon as I get
back, he’ll probably only send an answer to the message. I don’t expect he’ll actually
come over.’
Her words were sensible and to the point and were spoken in the same thrilling tone
that had first attracted him. Jia Yun would have liked to ask her name, but etiquette
forbade that he should do so now that he knew she was one of Bao-yu’s maids. He
just said:
‘I’m sure you’re right. I’ll come again tomorrow, then.’
He turned to go.
‘I’ll get some tea for you, Mr Jia,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Have a cup of tea before you go.’
‘No thanks,’ said Jia Yun, looking back over his shoulder but continuing to go. ‘I’ve
got other business.’
The words were for Tealeaf, but the look which accom?panied them was directed at
the soft-voiced maid, who was still standing there.
Jia Yun went back home and returned next day as she had advised. On his way in he
ran into Xi-feng outside the main gate. She was about to visit Jia Lian’s parents next
door and had just got into her carriage. Seeing Jia Yun, she made her attendants call
to him to stop.
‘Yun!’ She smiled at him through the window of the carriage. ‘You’ve got a nerve,
my lad, playing a trick like that on me! I see now why you gave me that present. It’s a
job you were after. Your Uncle told me yesterday. Apparently you’ve been on to him
about it already.’
Jia Yun smiled back ruefully:
‘I’d rather we didn’t go into my dealings with Uncle, if you don’t mind! I’m
beginning to wish I’d never spoken to him about it. If I’d realized earlier what the
situation was, I should have gone straight to you in the first place. I’m sure if I had, it
would all have been settled long ago. I’m afraid Uncle has let me down.’
‘Humph!’ said Xi-feng. ‘So that’s why you came to me yesterday, is it? You’d had no
success with the husband so you thought you’d try your luck with the wife!’
‘That’s most unfair, Auntie!’ Jia Yun protested. ‘It was a purely disinterested present.
I wasn’t thinking at all about a job when I gave it to you. If I had been, why do you
suppose I didn’t take the opportunity of asking you about it at the time? However,
since you do now know that I’m looking for one, I’d like to forget about Uncle and
throw myself on your kindness instead.’
‘You have a very devious way of going about things,’ said Xi-feng with a hint of
malice in her smile. ‘Why couldn’t you have spoken up sooner? A little thing like this
is hardly worth so much delay. We still need some more trees and shrubs planted in
the garden, and I’ve been trying to think of someone to do the job. If you’d spoken
up earlier, it could all have been done by now.’
‘You can set me to work tomorrow, Auntie. I’ll be ready.’
Xi-feng thought for a while.
‘I don’t know that it’s a very suitable job for you. Perhaps we’d better wait until
next New Year and put you in charge of lanterns and fireworks. That’s a much bigger
job.’
‘Look, Auntie: you give me this planting job now, then; if you’re satisfied with the
way I do it, you can give me the other job later on.’
Xi-feng laughed:
‘You certainly know how to fish with a long line! — All right, then! It’s not really my
affair, but I suppose as your Uncle has mentioned it to me — I’m only going next door
now and I shall be back again after lunch. Come round a little after midday to get the
money and you shall start your planting the day after tomorrow.’
She told the servants to harness the carriage and drove off to make her call.
Beside himself with joy, Jia Yun now continued on his way to Sunset Studio to look for
Bao-yu. In point of fact Bao-yu had gone off first thing that morning to call on the
Prince of Bei-jing; but no one seemed to know about this, and Jia Yun sat waiting
expectantly throughout the whole of the morning. Having waited until noon, he
inquired whether Xi-feng was back yet, and being informed that she was, he wrote
out a form of receipt, took it round to the Lians’ apartment, and sent in word that he
had called for his tally. Sunshine came out in response to his message and asked him
for the receipt, which he took indoors. Presently he reappeared and handed it back
to Jia Yun with the date and amount filled in in the blanks he had left for this purpose,
together with the precious tally which would enable him to draw the money.
Glancing at the receipt as he took it from him, Jia Yun was delighted to observe that
the figures entered were for a payment of two hundred taels of silver. He hurried off
to the counting-house to collect it, then home once more to share the joyful news
with his mother.
Next day he was off long before daylight to look up Ni Er and pay him back the loan.
That done, he took another fifty taels of the silver with him and called on a
nurseryman outside the West Gate called Fang Chun, from whom he bought a large
number of trees.
At this point our narrative abandons Jia Yun’s affairs and returns to Bao-yu.
When Bao-yu, in the course of his meeting with Jia Yun, had invited Jia Yun to drop in
and spend the following day with him, the invitation was of the careless, half-serious
kind that is unfortunately typical of young gentlemen of his class. As he had made no
real effort to remember it at the time, it naturally slipped his memory the following
day. Returning now, two evenings later, from the palace of the Prince of Bei-jing
where he had been all day, he called first on his grandmother and his mother and
then returned to his own rooms in the garden and changed back into his everyday
clothes.
He decided to take a bath; and since Aroma was out, having been ‘borrowed’ by
Bao-chai to make braid buttons on a dress, Ripple and Emerald had gone off to see
about the water. Of the other senior maids, Skybright had been fetched home for her
cousin’s birthday and Musk was away ill; and the few heavy-work maids left in
attendance had all assumed that their services would not be required and had gone
off in search of their gossips. For a quarter of an hour Bao-yu was left entirely on his
own. It chanced that precisely at this mo?ment he wanted someone to get him some
tea. He had already called a couple of times without response and at his third call
two or three old charwomen came hurrying in to see what was the matter.
‘No, no: I don’t need you!’ - he waved them away im?patiently. The old women
retired, baffled.
Since there were no maids, Bao-yu saw that he would have to serve himself. He
found himself a cup and was about to take up the pot to pour himself some tea when
a voice started speaking right behind him:
‘Let me, Master Bao! You might scald yourself.’
Bao-yu jumped. The owner of the voice hurriedly relieved him of the cup.
‘Where have you been all this time?’ he said. ‘You gave me quite a start, coming up
suddenly like that!’
She handed him his tea with a smile:
‘I was in the back courtyard. I came in through the courtyard door at the back.
Didn’t you hear me coming?’
Bao-yu sipped his tea and observed her carefully. Her dress, though not shabby, was
far from new. By contrast she had a magnificent head of raven-black hair which was
done up in a simple bun. The face was rather long and thin; the build slender; the
overall impression that of a tidy, clean, graceful person.
‘Do you belong here then?’ he asked her.
‘Yes.’ She seemed amused.
‘If you do, how is it that I’ve never seen you before?’
She replied with some bitterness:
‘There are quite a few of us you’ve never seen. I’m not the only one, by any means.
How could you have seen me? I’ve never been allowed to wait on you or show myself
in your presence.’
‘Why not?’
‘I don’t think it’s for me to say. — Oh, there’s something I do have to tell you,
though. Yesterday a gentleman calling himself “Yun” came to see you. I thought you
probably wouldn’t be able to see him at the time, so I told Tealeaf to ask him round
this morning. Unfortunately by the time he came, you’d already gone off to see the
Prince—’
Their conversation was interrupted by the giggles of Ripple and Emerald who had just
entered the courtyard with a large bucket of water. Each of them held the bucket by
one hand and lifted her skirts up with the other. They were staggering under the
unaccustomed weight and slopping a good deal of the water about as they went. The
maid hurried out to relieve them. By now the giggles had given way to
recriminations:
‘Look, you’ve soaked my dress!’
‘You trod on my toe!’
They stopped to look at this person who had just issued from the young Master’s
room and saw with some surprise that it was Crimson. Putting down the water, they
hurried indoors to look. Bao-yu was there on his own. The girls were indignant. As
soon as they had prepared the bath and seen him undressed, they shut the door
after them and hurried to the other side of the building to find Crimson.
‘What were you doing in his room just now?’ they asked her accusingly.
‘I wasn’t doing anything,’ said Crimson. ‘I couldn’t find my handkerchief, so I went
to look for it round the back. He was calling for some tea and none of you happened
to be about, so I ran in and poured it out for him. And just at that moment you came
back.’
Ripple spat in her face:
‘Nasty, shameless little slut! When we asked you to fetch the water for us you said
you were busy and made us go ourselves. You didn’t waste much time, having got
him to yourself, did you? You think you’re on the way up, don’t you? Step by step.
Well, we can catch up with you, my fine lady! Why don’t you take a look at yourself in
the mirror and then ask yourself if you’re a fit person to go serving tea to the
Masters?’
‘We’d better warn the others that when he asks for tea or anything in future they
must stay where they are and let her go and get it!’
‘In that case,’ said Ripple, ‘the rest of us may as well clear off and let her have him
all to herself!’
They were still at their antiphonal taunting when an old woman arrived with a
message from Xi-feng:
‘Someone is bringing some workmen in tomorrow to plant trees, so you have all
got to be extra careful. No hanging clothes out to dry all over the place! There will be
screens put up along the line of the embankment and you are not to go running
around outside.’
‘Who’s the person in charge of the workmen?’ asked Ripple.
‘A young chap called “Yun” from up the Lane,’ said the old woman.
The name meant nothing to Ripple and Emerald, who went on to ask about other
matters; but Crimson knew it must be the young man she had met the day before in
the outer study.
Crimson’s surname was ‘Lin’. Her family had been retainers in the Jia family for
generations. Nowadays her father worked as a farm-bailiff on the family’s estates.
She was sixteen. Along with many other servants, she had originally entered the
Prospect Garden to carry out caretaking duties in the period when it was still
unoccupied. The part of it she was assigned to was the House of Green Delights. She
found it a very beautiful place to live in — very quiet and secluded. But this had
changed when Bao-yu and the girls were commanded to move in and Bao-yu had
chosen the House of Green Delights as his own residence.
Although Crimson was a very inexperienced maid, she had a measure of good looks
and a determination to better herself. She was therefore constantly on the look-out
for an opportunity of making herself known to Bao-yu and showing off her ability to
serve him. Unfortunately the little group of body-servants who had accompanied him
into the garden guarded their privileges with tooth and claw and were careful to
allow no toehold to an ambitious outsider. Today she had at last found an opening,
only to have her hopes immediately dashed by Ripple’s malice. She felt very
discouraged.
Still smarting with resentment, she heard the old woman say that Jia Yun was coming
next day into the garden. The name provoked a momentary flutter in her breast; but
she returned to her room with the same feeling of resentment bottled up inside her
and went to bed to ponder moodily on the events of the day. As the thoughts
pursued themselves round and round in her mind without object or conclusion, she
suddenly heard her name being called very softly outside her window:
‘Crimson! Crim! I’ve found your handkerchief!’ She quickly got up and went outside
to look. To her sur?prise it was Jia Yun. A maidenly confusion mantled her comely
cheek.
‘Where did you find it?’ she asked timidly.
Jia Yun laughed:
‘Come over here and I’ll show you!’
He took hold of her dress to pull her to him. Overcome with shame, she turned and
fled, but her foot caught on the thresh?old and she fell on her face.
The conclusion of this adventure will be revealed in the following chapter.




CHAPTER 25

Two cousins are subjected by witchcraft to
the assaults of demons
And the Magic Jade meets an old acquaintance while
rather the worse for wear

We have seen how Crimson, after lying a long time a prey to confused and troubled
thoughts, at last dozed off to sleep; and how later, when Jia Yun grabbed at her, she
turned and fled, only to stumble and fall on the threshold of her room. At that point
she woke in bed and discovered that she had been dreaming. She did not get to sleep
again after that, but lay tossing restlessly throughout the night.
When daylight came at last, she got up, and shortly after was joined by the other
maids who shared with her the early morning duties of sweeping the rooms and
courtyards and fetching water for the others’ washing.
Crimson’s own toilet was a simple one: a brief look in the mirror while she coiled her
hair, a quick wash, and she was ready to join the others in their sweeping.
Her encounter with Bao-yu had made a stronger impression on that impressionable
young man than she realized. He had even thought of asking for her by name to wait
upon him, but hesitated, partly from fear of offending Aroma and the rest, and partly
because he did not know what she was really like and dreaded the unpleasantness of
sending her away again if she proved unsatisfactory. The question still preoccupied
him when he woke that morning. He rose quite early and sat musing silently on his
own, making no effort to begin his toilet.
In a little while the paper-covered shutters were removed and he was able to see
clearly through the silken gauze of the casement into the courtyard outside. He could
see several girls there sweeping, all of them heavily made-up and with flowers and
ornaments in their hair, but no sign of the quiet, neat girl of the day before. He went
outside in his slippers to look around, pretending that he had gone out to inspect the
flowers. He could see someone leaning on the balustrade in the south-west corner of
the cloister-like covered walk, but she was half hidden by the crab-apple tree and he
could not make out who it was. He approached and looked more closely. It was she,
yesterday’s girl, standing there on her own, apparently lost in thought. He was a little
shy of addressing her at that particular moment and was still hesi?tating when
Emerald came up and asked him to come in and wash. He had to go in again without
having spoken to her.
While Crimson stood there musing, she suddenly became aware that Aroma was
beckoning to her, and hurried up to see what she wanted.
‘Our spittoon is broken,’ Aroma said. ‘Can you go to Miss Lin’s and ask them if they
will lend us one until we can get a replacement?’
Crimson hurried off in the direction of the Naiad’s House. When she got to Green
Haze Bridge, she stopped a moment to look around. She noticed that cloth screens
had been set up all along the side of the artificial hill, and remembered that this was
the day on which the workmen were coming into the garden to plant trees. She could
just make out a knot of workmen digging a hole in the distance and Jia Yun sitting on
some rocks supervising them. She would have liked to go over, but did not quite dare,
and having collected the spit?toon, returned, in very low spirits, and lay down in her
own room to brood. The others all assumed that she must be feeling unwell and took
no notice.

*

Next day was the birthday of Wang Zi-teng’s lady. A mes?sage had already been
received from that quarter inviting Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang to spend the day
with her. Lady Wang would have liked to go but felt unable, even though the
invitation was from her brother’s wife, because she could see that Grandmother Jia
did not want to. Wang Zi-teng’s other sister, Aunt Xue, went instead, together with
his niece Xi-feng, Bao-chai, Bao-yu and the three Jia girls. They did not return until
the evening.
Not long before they returned, Jia Huan got back from school and Lady Wang gave
him the task of copying out the text of that prolonger of life and highly efficacious
prophylactic against sickness and misfortune, the Dharani of the Immaculate
Diamond. He seated himself on Lady Wang’s kang, called for a candle to be lit, and,
with a great deal of self-important fuss, began his copying, one minute calling for
Suncloud to pour him tea, the next requiring Silver to trim the wick of his candle, and
shortly after that informing Golden that she was standing in his light. The maids all
hated Jia Huan and took no notice — all, that is, except Sunset, who had always had a
soft spot for him. She poured him a cup of tea and, observing that Lady Wang was
engaged in conversation with someone elsewhere in the apartment, quietly
counselled some restraint:
‘Try not to throw your weight about so!’ she said. ‘It’s silly to put people’s backs
up.’
Jia Huan scowled angrily:
‘I know what I’m doing,’ he said. ‘Don’t talk to me like a child! You’re friends with
Bao-yu nowadays, aren’t you? You don’t like me any more. I know. I’ve watched you
both.’
Sunset clenched her teeth. She stabbed the air above his head with her finger:
‘You ungrateful thing! You’re like the dog that bit Lü Dong-bin: you don’t know a
friend when you see one.’
They were still exchanging words when Xi-feng came in, having just got back from the
birthday party. Lady Wang wanted to know about the other ladies who had been
invited, whether the plays had been any good, and what sort of things they had had
to eat and drink.
In a little while Bao-yu, too, arrived, and after a few re?spectful words to his mother,
asked the servants to take off his headband and gown for him and help him off with
his boots. Disencumbered, he flung himself into his mother’s bosom to be fondled
and petted by her, then, worming his way up and nuzzling affectionately against her
neck, he proceeded to add his own amusing commentary on the day’s events.
‘You’ve been drinking again, child,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Your face is burning. All this
romping about will make you sick. Lie down quietly for a while over there!’
She made them bring him a head-rest, and he lay down behind her, towards the back
of the kang. Sunset was in?structed to massage him by gently patting his legs.
He tried to joke with Sunset as she knelt beside him, but she barely acknowledged his
questions and answered frigidly, directing her eyes and all her attention upon Jia
Huan. Bao-yu seized her hand:
‘Come, my dear! You must take notice of me if I speak to you!’
He tugged at her hand as he spoke, but she snatched it from his grasp.
‘If you do that again,’ she said, ‘I shall call out!’
Jia Huan heard every word of this exchange. He had always hated Bao-yu, and this
flirting with Sunset — his Sunset — was the last straw. He must be revenged or burst.
A moment’s reflection suggested the means. He had only to feign a slight clumsiness
of the hand and it was done. The candle, brimming with molten wax, toppled straight
on to Bao-yu’s face. There was a piercing cry, which made everyone else in the room
jump. Quickly they brought standard lamps up from the floor below. By their light
Bao-yu’s face was seen to be covered all over in wax. Torn between anguish for him
and anger with Jia Huan, Lady Wang urged the servants to remove it as quickly as
possible, while alternately berating the other boy for his carelessness. Xi-feng
scrambled up on to the kang to help the servants, grumbling at Jia Huan as she did
so:
‘Huan, you are the most cack-handed creature I have ever met! You are simply not
fit for decent company. I don’t know why Aunt Zhao hasn’t taught you better.’
Her words reminded Lady Wang that she had been abusing a Master in front of the
servants. She ceased rebuking Jia Huan at once and, summoning Aunt Zhao, directed
all her wrath upon that luckless concubine:
‘This is a fine son you bore us, I must say! He is a black-?hearted little monster! You
might at least try to teach him better. But no. Time and again I have overlooked this
sort of thing, but instead of feeling sorry, you glory in it. You think that when I do
nothing, you have got the better of me.’
Aunt Zhao was obliged to swallow her anger and endure these taunts in silence. She
climbed up onto the kang and made a show of helping the others with the injured
boy. She looked at his face. The whole left side of it was badly blistered. It was a
wonder that the eye had not been damaged. When Lady Wang saw it, she was both
full of anguish for her son and at the same time, when she thought of the
questioning to which she would inevitably be subjected by Grandmother Jia and
wondered what she would say, terrified on her own account. To relieve her fear she
turned once more on Aunt Zhao. Then, after tongue-lashing the concubine, she
comforted her beloved son and applied Antiphlogistic Ointment to the blistered part
of his face.
‘It does hurt a bit,’ said Bao-yu when she asked him, ‘but nothing very terrible.
When Grandma asks about it, we had better tell her that I did it.’
‘She’ll blame the rest of us for not looking after you properly, even if you say you
did it yourself,’ said Xi-feng. ‘There’ll be a row, whatever you say.’
Lady Wang told them to see him back to his room. It was a great shock to Aroma and
the other maids when they saw him.
Dai-yu had had a dull time of it with Bao-yu away all day, and in the course of the
evening sent several times round to his room to inquire whether he was back yet. It
was in this way that she heard about his scalding. She hurried round immediately to
see for herself how he was.
She found him with a mirror in his hand, examining the extent of the damage. The
entire left side of his face was thickly plastered with ointment, from which she
deduced that the injury must be a serious one. But when she approached him to look
closer, he averted his head and waved her away. He knew how squeamish she was,
and feared that the sight of it would upset her. Dai-yu for her part was sufficiently
aware of her own weakness not to insist on looking. She merely asked him ‘whether
it hurt very badly’.
‘Not so bad as all that,’ said Bao-yu. ‘A couple of days and it will probably be all
right again.’
Dai-yu sat with him a little longer and then went back to her room.
Next day Bao-yu had to see Grandmother Jia. Although he told her that he had
burned himself through his own carelessness, the old lady, as had been predicted,
berated his attendants for having allowed the accident to happen.
Another day went by, and Bao-yu’s godmother, old Mother Ma, called round. Mother
Ma was a Wise Woman. Her special relationship with Bao-yu had been arranged in
his infancy to ensure him the protection of her powers. She was shocked by her
godson’s appearance and, on being informed of the cause, shook her head and
tutted sympathetically. She made a few signs over his face with her fingers, muttering
some gibberish as she did so, after which she assured them that he would soon be
better the malignant aura that had caused the accident was of a transitory,
impermanent nature. She turned to Grand?mother Jia:
‘Bless you, my lucky lady! Bless you dearie! You don’t know a half of the unseen
harms and dangers the Scripture tells us of. All the sons of princes and great folks the
moment they begin to grow up are followed round everywhere they go by troops of
invisible little imps—spiteful little creatures who nip them and pinch them whenever
they can. Sometimes they knock the rice bowl from their hands when they’re eating.
Sometimes they push them over when they are walking. It’s on account of these
creatures that so many young gentlemen of good family don’t live to make old
bones.’
Grandmother Jia was anxious to know if the afflicted person could be freed from
these unwelcome attentions.
‘Easily,’ said Mother Ma. ‘By doing good works. Giving a bit more to charity on the
young person’s behalf. There is another way, though. According to what the Scripture
says, there’s a Bodhisattva of Universal Light living in the Para?dise of the West who
spends his time lighting up the dark places where these evil spirits lurk, and if any
believer, male or female, will make offerings to that Bodhisattva in a proper spirit of
devoutness, he will grant their children and grandchildren his holy peace and protect
them from possession by devils and from the powers of darkness.’
‘What sort of offerings do you make to this Bodhisattva?’ Grandmother Jia asked
her.
‘Nothing very special. Apart from the usual incense offerings, we take a few pounds
of sesame oil each day and make what we call a “sea of light” by burning wicks in it.
We believe that this sea of light is the trans-substantial body of the Bodhisattva. It
has to be kept burning night and day and never allowed to go out.’
‘How much oil does it take to keep it burning for one whole day and night?’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘I should like to do this for the boy.’
‘There’s no fixed amount,’ said Mother Ma. ‘We leave it to our clients to decide
how much they want to give. There are several members of the aristocracy among
those I do this service for. Let’s see … There’s the Prince of An-nan’s lady. She’s my
biggest subscriber. Her subscription is for forty-eight pounds of oil and a pound of
lampwicks a day. Her sea of light is pretty nearly as big as a cistern. Then there’s the
Marquis of Jin-xiang’s lady: twenty pounds of oil a day. Oh, and there’s some pays for
ten pounds a day, some for eight pounds, three pounds, five pounds - all sorts. All of
them I keep their seas of light burning for them, back at my house.’
Grandmother Jia nodded thoughtfully.
‘One thing I should mention,’ said Mother Ma (observing the thoughtfulness): ‘if
the offering is for an older person — a mother or father, say — it doesn’t matter how
much you subscribe; but if it’s an older person making it for a younger one, like as it
may be Your Ladyship for Bao-yu, you don’t want to subscribe too much, or it would
overload his luck and have the opposite effect. In the case of Your Ladyship
subscribing for Bao-yu, I should suggest between five and seven pounds a day.’
‘Make it five pounds a day, then,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘We’ll work out the total
and send you a month’s supply every month.’
‘Amitabha, Merciful Buddha! Bless His Holy Name!’ said Mother Ma.
As a further precaution Grandmother Jia called in some of Bao-yu’s maids and told
them that in future whenever Bao-yu went out anywhere his pages were to be
provided with several strings of cash to give as alms to any itinerant monks or priests
or any poor or afflicted persons they might meet upon the way.
After seeing Grandmother Jia, Mother Ma drifted round the mansion calling at
various other apartments. Presently she came to Aunt Zhao’s room. After they had
exchanged greetings, Aunt Zhao told her little servant to pour the old woman a cup
of tea. Aunt Zhao was pasting pieces of cloth together for soling shoes with, and
Mother Ma observed that the kang around her was piled with miscellaneous
remnants of material.
‘I’m looking for something to make a pair of uppers out of, dearie,’ said Mother Ma.
‘I suppose you haven’t got an old bit of silk or an old bit of satin that would do? It
doesn’t matter about the colour.’
Aunt Zhao heaved a long-suffering sigh:
‘Take a look at this lot! You won’t find anything much worth having here. Nothing
worth having in this family ever comes my way. But you’re welcome to pick out a
couple of pieces if you don’t mind the poor quality.’
Mother Ma rummaged around in the heap, and having picked out several pieces,
stuffed them into her sleeve.
‘I sent someone round to you the other day with five hundred cash to pay for an
offering to the Medicine Bud?dha,’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘Have you managed to make it
yet?’
‘Oh yes. That was done days ago.’
‘Holy Name!’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘I’d do it oftener if things were a bit easier; but you
know the saying: “my heart is willing but my purse is lean”.’
‘Don’t you worry about that!’ said Mother Ma. ‘You only have to hold out a few
more years. When your Huan has grown up and got himself a job in the Service,
you’ll be able to afford all the good works you want.’
Aunt Zhao made a scornful sound in her nose:
‘Hfn! Let’s not talk about it! It’ll be no different then from what it is now: Huan and
I will never be able to compete with the Other One. It’s like the Heavenly Dragon
appearing when he comes on the scene. Mind you, I don’t hold it against the child.
He’s a good-looking boy, is Bao-yu, and you can understand the grown-ups being silly
about him. No, this is the one I can’t stand.’
As she uttered the word ‘this’, she held up two fingers. Mother Ma guessed her
meaning: ‘Number Two’ — the youn?ger of the Rong mansion’s two
daughters-in-law.
‘You mean Mrs Lian?’ she said.
Aunt Zhao’s face assumed an expression of terror. Motion?ing agitatedly to the other
to remain silent, she got up, went to the door, raised the door-blind, looked around,
and having satisfied herself that there were no eavesdroppers, came back and sat
down again, her face close to Mother Ma’s.
‘She’s a dreadful person — dreadful! If that woman doesn’t end up by carrying off
every stick of property belonging to this family to line her own nest with, my name’s
not Zhao!’
Mother Ma sensed interesting possibilities in this conver?sation, and was quick to
explore them:
‘It doesn’t need you to tell me that,’ she said. ‘You surely don’t think I haven’t
noticed that? I’ve often wondered why you all let her get away with it — though I
suppose it’s probably just as well you do.’
‘My dear good woman,’ said Aunt Zhao, ‘we’ve no choice but to let her get away
with it. Who would ever have the nerve to stand up to her?
‘Well,’ said Mother Ma, ‘I don’t want to seem a trouble-maker, but if you don’t
mind my saying so, you do all seem to have acted a hit helpless about her — not that
I’m blaming you, mind. But I mean to say, even if you daren’t stand up to her openly,
there are things you could do in secret. I’m surprised you haven’t thought of it
before.’
To Aunt Zhao the words seemed to contain a hidden promise. She concealed her
pleasure.
‘What do you mean: “things we could do in secret”?’ she said. ‘I’m willing enough
to do them: it’s just that I’ve never met anyone who could tell me how. If you would
show me the way, I’d pay you. I’d pay a lot.’
Mother Ma could see that they understood each other, but she was taking no
chances.
‘Holy Name! Don’t ask me about things like that! I don’t touch that kind of business.
No, no, no. That’s wicked.’
There you are!’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘That’s all the help I ever get. And I thought you were
such a kind person, always helping those in trouble. Are you prepared to stand by
and watch me and my Huan being made mincemeat of by that scheming woman? I
suppose it’s because you think I wouldn’t pay you.’
‘If you was to say that I am too tender-hearted to stand by and watch you and your
boy being wronged,’ said Mother Ma, ‘you would be saying no more nor less than the
truth. But I don’t know what you mean about pay. What have you got that you could
tempt me with, dearie, even if I was willing to do it for pay?’
Aunt Zhao observed that her opposition to the very idea of helping her in the desired
way had considerably weakened.
‘For someone so clever,’ she said, ‘aren’t you being rather stupid? If you help me
and it works, with the two of them safely out of the way, everything in this
household will be ours. You’ll be able to ask for what you like. Fancy not thinking of
that!’
Mother Ma lowered her head and reflected for a while in silence.
‘When that time comes and you’re safely landed,’ she said eventually, ‘you won’t
want to have anything more to do with me, dearie — not when I’ve got no proof to
show what I done for you.’
‘That’s no problem,’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘I’ve got a few taels put by of my own savings,
and I’ve got some dresses, and there’s my jewellery. You can take some of each to be
getting on with and I can give you an IOU promising to pay you so much later on. We
can have a witness too, if you like.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Why should I tell a lie?’ said Aunt Zhao, and summoned a trusted crone into whose
ear she whispered instructions:
‘Ps-ps-ps-ps-ps-ps-ps-ps.’
The old crone nodded and went out, returning after a few minutes with a promissory
note for five hundred taels of silver. Aunt Zhao made her mark on it and then went to
the wardrobe to get out her savings. The white shine of silver and the signed and
sealed IOU dispelled whatever residual doubts the Wise Woman may have
entertained, for she seized and pocketed both with alacrity, giving hearty assurances
of her aid as she did so; then, after rummaging for some time in the capacious
waistband of her trousers, she fished out twelve little paper cut-out figures — ten of
them demons with green faces and red hair and two of them plain human figures —
and handed them to Aunt Zhao. Dropping her voice to a whisper, she instructed her
to write the eight symbols of her victims’ nativity — two for the year, two for the
month, two for the day and two for the hour — on each of the human figures, wrap
five of the demons round each of them, and slip them some?where under her
victims’ beds.
‘That’s all you have to do,’ she said. ‘I shall be doing other things at home to help
you. It’s sure to work - no question of that. But you must be very, very careful. And
you mustn’t be afraid.’
While she was still talking, one of Lady Wang’s maids came in looking for her.
‘Oh, here you are! Her Ladyship is waiting for you.’ Mother Ma went off in the
company of the maid.
And there we leave her.

*

Because of the injury to his face, Bao-yu had stopped going out of doors since his
accident and Dai-yu spent a good deal of time in his apartment talking to him.
One morning after lunch she had settled down to read, but after a couple of chapters
grew bored with the book and did some sewing instead with the maids Nightingale
and Snowgoose. When that, too, became boring, she stood for a while leaning
against the doorway, vacantly looking out. The young bamboo shoots were just
breaking through in the forecourt, and after inspecting them, she drifted out into the
Garden. Everywhere the flowers were blooming, the birds were singing, and the
water splashed and tinkled, but not a human soul was to be seen. Almost without
thinking where she was going, she made her way to the House of Green Delights. A
group of maids had fetched some water from the well and were watching the
white-eyes in the gallery giving themselves a bath. A sound of laughter came from
inside the house. Li Wan, Xi-feng and Bao-chai were there already. Their friendly
laughter greeted Dai-yu as she entered:
‘Another one! Come in! Come in!’
‘What is this?’ said Dai-yu, joining in the good humour. ‘A party?’
‘I sent someone round to you the other day with two caddies-full of tea,’ said
Xi-feng, ‘but you were out.’
‘Yes,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’m sorry: I forgot to thank you.’
‘Have you tried it?’ said Xi-feng. ‘What did you think of it?’
‘I wouldn’t ask, if I were you,’ said Bao-yu, chipping in. ‘I thought it was rotten. I
don’t know what the rest of you thought about it.’
‘I thought the flavour was all right,’ said Bao-chai. ‘The colour wasn’t up to much.’
‘That was tribute tea from Siam,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I didn’t like it at all. I thought it
wasn’t as nice as the tea we drink every day.’
‘Oh, I quite liked it,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Your palates must be more sensitive than mine.’
‘If you really like it,’ said Bao-yu, ‘you’re welcome to have mine.’
‘I’ve still got quite a bit left,’ said Xi-feng. ‘If you really like it, you can have it all.’
‘Thank you very much,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’ll send someone round to fetch it.’
‘No, don’t do that,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ll send it round to you. There’s something I want
you to do for me. The person I send round about it can bring the tea as well.’
Dai-yu laughed mockingly:
‘Do you hear that, everybody? Because she’s given me a hit of her old tea, I have to
start doing odd jobs for her.’
‘That’s fair enough,’ said Xi-feng. ‘You know the rule:
“drink the family’s tea, the family’s bride-to-be”.’
Everyone laughed at this except Dai-yu, who turned her head away, blushing furiously,
and said nothing.
‘Cousin Feng will have her little joke,’ Li Wan observed to Bao-chai with a smile.
‘Do you call that a joke?’ said Dai-yu. ‘It was a silly, idle remark, and very irritating.’
She gave a snort of disgust by way of reinforcement.
Xi-feng laughed:
‘What’s so irritating about it? Look at him!’ — She pointed at Bao-yu - ‘Isn’t he
good enough for you? Good looks, good family, good income. There are no snags
that I can see. It’s a perfect match!’
Dai-yu rose and fled.
‘Oh, Frowner’s in a rage! Come back Frowner!’ Bao-chai called out after her. ‘If you
go, it will spoil all the fun.’
She got up and went after Dai-yu to bring her back. At the doorway they ran into Jia
Zheng’s two concubines, Aunt Zhao and Aunt Zhou, come to see Bao-yu. Li Wan,
Bao-chai and Bao-yu made them welcome and invited them to sit down and talk, but
Xi-feng and Dai-yu conversed with each other and rather pointedly ignored them.
Bao-chai was in the middle of saying something to the rest of the group when a maid
arrived from Lady Wang’s to say that Wang Zi-teng’s wife had come and the presence
of the young ladies was requested. Li Wan and Xi-feng rose to go. Aunt Zhao and
Aunt Zhou hurriedly took their leave.
‘I can’t go out,’ said Bao-yu. ‘For heaven’s sake don’t let Aunt Wang come over here!
- Cousin Lin!’ he called to Dai-yu. ‘Stay here a bit! There’s something I want to say to
you.’
Hearing him, Xi-feng turned back to address Dai-yu:
‘Do you hear that? Someone wants a word with you. You’d better go back and see
what he wants to say!’
She gave her a push in the direction of the house; then she and Li Wan went off, both
laughing.
When they were alone together, Bao-yu took Dai-yu by the hand. He smiled and
smiled, but said nothing. Dai-yu felt herself blushing, and tried to break away.
‘Aiyo!’ he said. ‘My head!’
‘Good!’ said Dai-yu. ‘It serves you right!’
Then Bao-yu let out a dreadful cry, jumped two or three feet into the air, and began
to shout and babble deliriously. Dai-yu and the maids were terrified and ran to tell
Lady Wang and Grandmother Jia. Wang Zi-teng’s lady was with them and hurried
over with the rest to see him. By the time they arrived he had already tried several
times to kill himself and was raving like a madman. His mother and grandmother
were so stricken by the sight that for a few moments they stood mute and trembling.
Then, breaking into loud weeping, they cried out to him piteously between their sobs:
‘my son!’, ‘my child!’, ‘my darling!’
Soon the news had spread to the other parts of the Rong household and to the
household next door and Jia She, Lady Xing, Cousin Zhen, Jia Zheng, Jia Lian, Jia Rong,
Jia Yun, Jia Ping, Aunt Xue and Xue Pan — not to mention Zhou Rui’s wife and a great
bevy of domestics both high and low — came hurrying into the garden, adding
numbers and confusion to the group of helpless spectators.
While they were still wondering what to do with Bao-yu, Xi-feng appeared,
brandishing a gleaming knife in one hand and attacking whatever came in her path.
She had already massacred several luckless dogs and hens and now, seeing people
ahead, glared at them madly and would have rushed upon them too had not Zhou
Rui’s wife and a few hefty and resourceful women servants advanced upon her while
the others looked on helplessly, clasped her about the arms and body, wrested the
knife from her hand, and carried her off to her room. Patience and Felicity wept
piteously to see their mistress in such a state.
On this occasion even Jia Zheng’s customary impassivity seemed to have deserted
him, as he turned this way and that, uncertain on whom to direct his attention. And if
Jia Zheng was distraught, the state of the others can be imagined. Most remarkable,
perhaps, was the. spectacle of Xue Pan fussing over his womenfolk, one moment
afraid that his mother would be jostled in the crush, the next that Bao-chai might be
ogled or Caltrop glad-eyed by some wanton male. Cousin Zhen, he knew for a fact,
was a notorious womanizer. Then he caught sight of Dai-yu (whom he had never seen
before) and forgot his anxiety in gawping admiration of that ethereal beauty.
Although no one knew what to do themselves, there were a great many opinions
about what ought to be done. Some said an exorcist should be called in to expel the
malignant spirits, some that it required a dancing medium to draw them out, some
offered charm-sheets invoking the demon-quelling powers of the Heavenly Master
and issued under the hand of the Taoist pontiff; yet in spite of prayers, incantations,
divin?ation, and all the expedients that faith and physic could pro?vide, there was no
visible improvement in the condition of the patients. At sundown Wang Zi-teng’s lady
took her leave and went home.
Next day she made another visit to inquire after them. This was followed by visits
from the wife of Grandmother Jia’s nephew the Marquis, from Lady Xing’s brothers’
wives, and from the wives of other marriage connections of the family. Bottled
charm-water, wonder-working monks and Taoists and highly recommended
physicians were also sent round to the mansion by various friends and relations.
But the cousins continued delirious and lay on their beds burning with fever and
babbling incomprehensibly. At nightfall they became even worse, so that the maids
and even the older women no longer dared go near them. The two of them had to be
carried into Lady Wang’s room on their beds and set down there side by side so that
Jia Yun and a group of pages could watch over them in shifts throughout the night.
Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang, Lady Xing and Aunt Xue stayed near at hand, refusing
to budge, though unable to do anything but sit by and weep. Jia She and Jia Zheng,
afraid that their mother’s health would suffer, displayed their con?cern by keeping
themselves and everyone else up throughout most of the night. There were lights
burning everywhere and hardly anyone slept at all.
Jia She continued to hunt everywhere for monks and ex?orcists reputed able to cure
diseases of the mind. Finally, Jia Zheng, who saw that their methods were all useless,
lost patience with him and tried to make him stop:
‘Young people will die if they must. Nothing can alter fate. And that they are fated
to die would appear from the fact that all efforts to cure them have been unavailing. I
think we should allow them to die in peace.’
But Jia She took no notice, and the commotion continued as before.
By the third day the patients were so weakened that they lay on their beds
motionless and their breathing was scarcely perceptible. The whole family had by
now abandoned hope and were already making preparations for their laying-out.
Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang, Jia Lian, Patience and Aroma had cried themselves into
a state bordering on prostration. Only Aunt Zhao was cheerful — though she did her
best to look miserable.
Early on the fourth day Bao-yu suddenly opened his eyes wide and spoke to
Grandmother Jia:
‘From now on I can no longer stay in this family. You must get my things ready and
let me go.’
To the old lady the words were a tearing of heart from body; but Aunt Zhao, who also
heard them, had the temerity to urge their acceptance:
‘Your Ladyship shouldn’t take it so hard. It’s already all up with the boy. We should
be getting his grave clothes ready so that he can go in peace. It will be better that
way. If we won’t let him go now, when he’s ready, it will only make more suffering for
him in the world to come…’
She would have gone on, but Grandmother Jia spat in her face. No empty gesture: it
was a full gob of spittle.
‘Evil woman! May your tongue rot! How do you know it’s all up with him? You want
him to die, don’t you? But if you think you will gain by his death, you must be
dreaming; because if he does die, I shall hold you responsible. It’s your spiteful
meddling that has forced him to do all this studying. You have reduced the poor child
to such a state that the mere sight of his father makes him more scared than a mouse
with the cat after it. You have done this, you and the others of your kind. And now I
suppose, if you succeed in murdering him, you will be satisfied. But don’t imagine
you will escape me — any of you!’
She railed and wept. Jia Zheng was close at hand while she was saying all this and
was deeply distressed by it. Per?emptorily dismissing the concubine, he tried to calm
his mother and reasoned against the injustice of her charges.
It was unfortunate that just at that moment a servant should have come in to
announce that ‘the two coffins that had been ordered were now ready’. The words
were as oil upon fire. The old lady blazed.
‘Who gave orders for those coffins to be made? Where is the man who made them?
Go and get the man who made those coffins! Flog him to death!’
Suddenly, as she raged and stormed, the faint tock tock of a holy man’s wooden fish
was heard upon the air and a high monotone chant that kept time with the beat:
‘Na-mah A-mi-ta-bha Bo-dhi-satt-va!
Mer-ci-ful de-li-ve-rer!
All a-fflic-ted and tor-men-ted,
               All a-ttacked by e-vil spi-rits,
        All de-mo-ni-ac po-sse-ssion,
        I cure,
        I cure,
        I cure.’

Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang at once sent someone into the street to see who it
was. The source of the chanting proved to be a disreputable-looking Buddhist monk.
Stone describes him in the following quatrain:

A bottle nose he had and shaggy brows,
Through which peeped eyes that twinkled like bright Stats.
His robe was patched and torn, his feet straw-shod,
His unclean pate blotched with unsightly scars.

He was accompanied by a lame Taoist, for whom a similar quatrain has been supplied
by our poetical Stone:

Up, down he hopped on his unequal legs,
From mud and puddle not a stitch left dry.
Yet, if you asked him where his dwelling was,
‘Westward of Paradise’ he would reply.

Jia Zheng had them invited in and asked them what monas?tery they were from. The
monk was genially dismissive:
‘There is no need for Your Worship to waste time on formalities. Suffice it to say
that I heard you had sickness in this house and have come to cure it.
‘Two members of this family have, indeed, fallen victims to some kind of
witchcraft,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Might one inquire what charm you intend to cure them
with?’
‘Charm?’ The monk laughed. ‘You already possess in your own house a precious
object capable of curing them. What other charm is necessary?’
Jia Zheng gave a start.
‘To be sure. My son was born with a piece of jade whose inscription makes some
such claim - “Dispels the harms of witchcraft”. But as you see, it does not appear to
possess the power it lays claim to.’
‘That is because the world and its temptations have confused it,’ said the monk. ‘It
certainly used to have the power. If you will have the goodness to fetch it for me and
allow me to hold it in my hand and say a wee prayer over it, I think I can undertake to
bring the power back again.’
Jia Zheng took the Magic Jade from Bao-yu’s neck and handed it to the monk, who
held it on the palm of his hand and addressed it with a sigh:
‘Thirteen years, old friend, since we first met under Green-sickness Peak! Time
certainly flies. But you have not finished with this world yet, you know. Dear, dear,
dear! You aren’t the Stone you were, are you?


—Time was you lived in perfect liberty,
Your heart alike from joy and sorrow free,
Till, by the smelter’s alchemy transformed,
Into the world you came to purchase misery.

By the bye, I am sorry you have been having such a disagree?able experience these
last few days.


—Vain sensual joys the jade’s sheen have besmirched;
The poor bird droops, in its close prison perched.
From drunken dreaming one day you’ll recover:
Then, when all debts are paid, the play will soon be over.’

When the monk had finished apostrophizing the stone, he rubbed it and polished it
between his hands and muttered some strange-sounding words over it.
‘There! Its power has now been restored.’ He handed it back to Jia Zheng. ‘But you
must be careful that it does not become contaminated again. Hang it above the
threshold of the bedroom and let no women apart from the patient’s own mother
and grandmother go inside. If you will do that, I can guarantee a complete recovery
in thirty-three days.’
Jia Zheng would have liked to detain the monk for tea and offer him some
remuneration, but he and the Taoist slipped quietly away and could not be traced.
The monk’s directions were scrupulously followed. Lady Wang guarded the doorway
in person and prevented any unauthorized person from getting into the bedroom. By
evening the sufferers had regained consciousness and said they were hungry. This
news, so precious to the ears of Lady Jia and Lady Wang, who at once had rice gruel
brought in to feed them with, was relayed to the girls in the outer room.
‘Bless His Holy Name!’ Dai-yu murmured fervently.
Bao-chai laughed, but said nothing. The others were mystified.
‘Why do you laugh, Cousin Bao?’ Xi-chun asked her.
‘I was thinking how busy He of the Holy Name must be,’ Bao-chai said. ‘Apart from
working for the salvation of all sentient beings, He has to protect the sick and hasten
their recovery — not to mention watching over plighted couples to make sure that
they marry and live happily ever after. What a lot He has to keep Him busy! Don’t you
find the thought rather amusing?’
Dai-yu affected scorn, but was blushing hotly.
‘You are all horrid. Instead of following good examples, you all imitate Feng and
make nasty, cheap jokes all the time.’
She raised the portiere and went out.
But if you wish to know more, you will have to wait for the next chapter.




CHAPTER 26

A conversation on Wasp Waist Bridge is a cover for
communication of a different kind
And a soliloquy overhead in the Naiad’s House reveals
unsuspected depths of feeling

By the time the thirty-three days’ convalescence had ended, not only were Bao-yu’s
health and strength completely restored, but even the burn-marks on his face had
vanished, and he was allowed to move back into the Garden.
It may be recalled that when Bao-yu’s sickness was at its height, it had been found
necessary to call in Jia Yun with a number of pages under his command to take turns
in watch?ing over him. Crimson was there too at that time, having been brought in
with the other maids from his apartment. During those few days she and Jia Yun
therefore had ample opportunity of seeing each other, and a certain familiarity
began to grow up between them.
Crimson noticed that Jia Yun was often to be seen sporting a handkerchief very much
like the one she had lost. She nearly asked him about it, but in the end was too shy.
Then, after the monk’s visit, the presence of the menfolk was no longer required and
Jia Yun went back to his tree-planting. Though Crimson could still not dismiss the
matter entirely from her mind, she did not ask anyone about it for fear of arousing
their suspicions.
A day or two after their return to Green Delights, Crimson was sitting in her room,
still brooding over this handkerchief business, when a voice outside the window
inquired whether she was in. Peeping through an eyelet in the casement she
recognized Melilot, a little maid who belonged to the same apartment as herself.
‘Yes, I’m in,’ she said. ‘Come inside!’
Little Melilot came bounding in and sat down on the bed with a giggle.
‘I’m in luck!’ she said. ‘I was washing some things in the yard when Bao-yu asked
for some tea to be taken round to Miss Lin’s for him and Miss Aroma gave me the job
of taking it. When I got there, Miss Lin had just been given some money by Her Old
Ladyship and was sharing it out among her maids, so when she saw me she just said
“Here you are!” and gave me two big handfuls of it. I’ve no idea how much it is. Will
you look after it for me, please?’
She undid her handkerchief and poured out a shower of coins. Crimson carefully
counted them for her and put them away in a safe place.
‘What’s been the matter with you lately?’ said Melilot. ‘If you ask me, I think you
ought to go home for a day or two and call in a doctor. I expect you need some
medicine.’
‘Silly!’ said Crimson. ‘I’m perfectly all right. What should I want to go home for?’
‘I know what, then,’ said Melilot. ‘Miss Lin’s very weakly. She’s always taking
medicine. Why don’t you ask her to give you some of hers? It would probably do just
as well.’
‘Oh, nonsense!’ said Crimson. ‘You can’t take other peo?ple’s medicines just like
that!’
‘Well, you can’t go on in this way,’ said Melilot, ‘never eating or drinking properly.
What will become of you?
‘Who cares?’ said Crimson. ‘The sooner I’m dead the better!’
‘You shouldn’t say such things,’ said Melilot, ‘It isn’t right.’
‘Why not?’ said Crimson. ‘How do you know what is on my mind?
Melilot shook her head sympathetically.
‘I can’t say I really blame you,’ she said. ‘Things are very difficult here at times. Take
yesterday, for example. Her Old Ladyship said that as Bao-yu was better now and
there was to be a thanksgiving for his recovery, all those who had the trouble of
nursing him during his illness were to be rewarded according to their grades. Well
now, I can understand the very young ones like me not being included, but why
should they leave you out? I felt really sorry for you when I heard that they’d left you
out. Aroma, of course, you’d expect to get more than anyone else. I don’t blame her
at all. In fact, I think it’s owing to her. Let’s be honest: none of us can compare with
Aroma. I mean, even if she didn’t always take so much trouble over everything, no
one would want to quarrel about her having a bigger share. What makes me so angry
is that people like Skybright and Mackerel should count as top grade when every?one
knows they’re only put there to curry favour with Bao-yu. Doesn’t it make you
angry?’
‘I don’t see much point in getting angry,’ said Crimson. ‘You know what they said
about the mile-wide marquee: “Even the longest party must have an end”? Well,
none of us is here for ever, you know. Another four or five years from now when
we’ve each gone our different ways it won’t matter any longer what all the rest of us
are doing.’
Little Melilot found this talk of parting and impermanence vaguely affecting and a
slight moisture was to be observed about her eyes. She thought shame to cry
without good cause, however, and masked her emotion with a smile:
‘That’s perfectly true. Only yesterday Bao-yu was going on about all the things he’s
going to do to his rooms and the clothes he’s going to have made and everything, just
as if he had a hundred or two years ahead of him with nothing to do but kill time in.’
Crimson laughed scornfully, though whether at Melilot’s simplicity or at Bao-yu’s
improvidence is unclear, since just as she was about to comment, a little maid came
running in, so young that her hair was still done up in two little girl’s horns. She was
carrying some patterns and sheets of paper.
‘You’re to copy out these two patterns.’
She threw them in Crimson’s direction and straightway darted out again. Crimson
shouted after her:
‘Who are they for, then? You might at least finish your message before rushing off.
What are you in such a tearing hurry about? Is someone steaming wheatcakes for
you and you’re afraid they’ll get cold?’
‘They’re for Mackerel.’ The little maid paused long enough to bawl an answer
through the window, then picking up her heels, went pounding off, plim-plam,
plim-plam, plim-plam, as fast as she had come.
Crimson threw the patterns crossly to one side and went to hunt in her drawer for a
brush to trace them with. After rummaging for several minutes she had only
succeeded in finding a few worn-out ones, too moulted for use.
‘Funny!’ she said. ‘I could have sworn I put a new one in there the other day ...’
She thought a bit, then laughed at herself as she remembered:
‘Of course. Oriole took it, the evening before last.’ She turned to Melilot. ‘Would
you go and get it for me, then?’
‘I’m afraid I can’t,’ said Melilot. ‘Miss Aroma’s waiting for me to fetch some boxes
for her. You’ll have to get it yourself.’
‘If Aroma’s waiting for you, why have you been sitting here gossiping all this time?’
said Crimson. ‘If I hadn’t asked you to go and get it, she wouldn’t have been waiting,
would she? Lazy little beast!’
She left the room and walked out of the gate of Green Delights and in the direction of
Bao-chai’s courtyard. She was just passing by Drenched Blossoms Pavilion when she
caught sight of Bao-yu’s old wet-nurse, Nannie Li, coming from the opposite direction
and stood respectfully aside to wait for her.
‘Where have you been, Mrs Li?’ she asked her. ‘I didn’t expect to see you here.’
Nannie Li made a flapping gesture with her hand:
‘What do you think, my dear: His Nibs has taken a fancy to the young fellow who
does the tree-planting — “Yin” or “Yun” or whatever his name is — so Nannie has to
go and ask him in. Let’s hope Their Ladyships don’t find out about it. There’ll be
trouble if they do.’
‘Are you really going to ask him in?’
‘Yes. Why?’
Crimson laughed:
‘If your Mr Yun knows what’s good for him, he won’t agree to come.’
‘He’s no fool,’ said Nannie Li. ‘Why shouldn’t he?’
‘Any way, if he does come in,’ said Crimson, ignoring her question, ‘you can’t just
bring him in and then leave him, Mrs Li. You’ll have to take him back again yourself
afterwards. You don’t want him wandering off on his own. There’s no knowing who
he might bump into.’
(Crimson herself, was the secret hope.)
‘Gracious me! I haven’t got that much spare time,’ said Nannie Li. ‘All I’ve done is
just to tell him that he’s got to come. I’ll send someone else to fetch him in when I
get back presently - one of the girls, or one of the older women, maybe.’
She hobbled off on her stick, leaving Crimson standing there in a muse, her mission
to fetch the tracing-brush mo?mentarily forgotten. She was still standing there a
minute or two later when a little maid came along, who, seeing that it was Crimson,
asked her what she was doing there. Crimson looked up. It was Trinket, another of
the maids from Green Delights.
‘Where are you going?’ Crimson asked her.
‘I’ve been sent to fetch Mr Yun,’ said Trinket. ‘I have to bring him inside to meet
Master Bao.’
She ran off on her way.
At the gate to Wasp Waist Bridge Crimson ran into Trinket again, this time with Jia
Yun in tow. His eyes sought Crim?son’s; and hers, as she made pretence of conversing
with Trinket, sought his. Their two pairs of eyes met and briefly skirmished; then
Crimson felt herself blushing, and turning away abruptly, she made off for Allspice
Court.

*
Our narrative now follows Jia Yun and Trinket along the winding pathway to the
House of Green Delights. Soon they were at the courtyard gate and Jia Yun waited
outside while she went in to announce his arrival. She returned presently to lead him
inside.
There were a few scattered rocks in the courtyard and some clumps of jade-green
plantain. Two storks stood in the shadow of a pine-tree, preening themselves with
their long bills. The gallery surrounding the courtyard was hung with cages of unusual
design in which perched or fluttered a wide variety of birds, some of them
gay-plumaged exotic ones. Above the steps was a little five-frame penthouse building
with a glimpse of delicately-carved partitions visible through the open doorway,
above which a horizontal board hung, inscribed with the words

CRIMSON JOYS AND GREEN DELIGHTS


‘So that’s why it’s called “The House of Green Delights”’ Jia Yun told himself. ‘The
name is taken from the inscription.’
A laughing voice addressed him from behind one of the silk gauze casements:
‘Come on in! It must be two or three months since I first forgot our appointment!’
Jia Yun recognized the voice as Bao-yu’s and hurried up the steps inside. He looked
about him, dazzled by the bril?liance of gold and semi-precious inlay-work and the
richness of the ornaments and furnishings, but unable to see Bao-yu in the midst of it
all. To the left of him was a full-length mirror from behind which two girls now
emerged, both about fifteen or sixteen years old and of much the same build and
height. They addressed him by name and asked him to come inside. Slightly
overawed, he muttered something in reply and hurried after them, not daring to take
more than a furtive glance at them from the corner of his eye. They ushered him into
a tent-like summer ‘cabinet’ of green net, whose principal furniture was a tiny
lacquered bed with crimson hangings heavily patterned in gold. On this Bao-yu,
wearing everyday clothes and a pair of bedroom slippers, was reclining, book in hand.
He threw the book down as Jia Yun entered and rose to his feet with a welcoming
smile. Jia Yun swiftly dropped knee and hand to floor in greeting. Bidden to sit, he
modestly placed himself on a bedside chair.
‘After I invited you round to my study that day,’ said Bao-yu, ‘a whole lot of things
seemed to happen one after the other, and I’m afraid I quite forgot about your visit.’
Jia Yun returned his smile:
‘Let’s just say that it wasn’t my luck to see you then. But you have been ill since
then, Uncle Bao. Are you quite better now?’
‘Quite better, thank you. I hear you’ve been very busy these last few days.’
‘That’s as it should be,’ said Jia Yun. ‘But I’m glad you are better, Uncle. That’s a
piece of good fortune for all of us.’
As they chatted, a maid came in with some tea. Jia Yun was talking to Bao-yu as she
approached, but his eyes were on her. She was tall and rather thin with a long oval
face, and she was wearing a rose-pink dress over a closely pleated white satin skirt
and a black satin sleeveless jacket over the dress.
In the course of his brief sojourn among them in the early days of Bao-yu’s illness, Jia
Yun had got by heart the names of most of the principal females of Bao-yu’s
establishment. He knew at a glance that the maid now serving him tea was Aroma.
He was also aware that she was in some way more important than the other maids
and that to be waited on by her in the seated presence of her master was an honour.
Jumping hastily to his feet he addressed her with a modest smile:
‘You shouldn’t pour tea for me, Miss! I’m not like a visitor here. You should let me
pour for myself!’
‘Oh do sit down!’ said Bao-yu. ‘You don’t have to be like that in front of the maids!’
‘I know,’ said Jia Yun. ‘But a body-servant! I don’t like to presume.’
He sat down, nevertheless, and sipped his tea while Bao-yu made conversation on a
number of unimportant topics. He told him which household kept the best troupe of
players, which had the finest gardens, whose maids were the prettiest, who gave the
best parties, and who had the best collection of curiosities or the strangest pets. Jia
Yun did his best to keep up with him. After a while Bao-yu showed signs of flagging,
and when Jia Yun, observing what appeared to be fatigue, rose to take his leave, he
did not very strongly press him to stay.
‘You must come again when you can spare the time,’ said Bao-yu, and ordered
Trinket to see him out of the Garden.
Once outside the gateway of Green Delights, Jia Yun looked around him on all sides,
and having ascertained that there was no one else about, slowed down to a more
dawdling pace so that he could ask Trinket a few questions. Indeed, the little maid
was subjected to quite a catechism: How old was she? What was her name? What
did her father and mother do? How many years had she been working for his Uncle
Bao? How much pay did she get a month? How many girls were there working for
him altogether? Trinket seemed to have no objection, however, and answered each
question as it came.
‘That girl you were talking to on the way in,’ he said, ‘isn’t her name “Crimson”?’
Trinket laughed:
‘Yes. Why do you ask?’
‘I heard her asking you about a handkerchief. Only it just so happens that I picked
one up.’
Trinket showed interest.
‘She’s asked me about that handkerchief of hers a number of times. I told her, I’ve
got better things to do with my time than go looking for people’s handkerchiefs. But
when she asked me about it again today, she said that if I could find it for her, she’d
give me a reward. Come to think of it, you were there when she said that, weren’t
you? It was when we were outside the gate of Allspice Court. So you can bear me out.
Oh Mr Jia, please let me have it if you’ve picked it up and I’ll be able to see what she
will give me for it!’
Jia Yun had picked up a silk handkerchief a month pre?viously at the time when his
tree-planting activities had just started. He knew that it must have been dropped by
one or another of the female inmates of the Garden, but not knowing which, had not
so far ventured to do anything about his dis?covery. When earlier on he had heard
Crimson question Trinket about her loss, he had realized, with a thrill of pleasure,
that the handkerchief he had picked up must have been hers. Trinket’s request now
gave him just the opening he required. He drew a handkerchief of his own from
inside his sleeve and held it up in front of her with a smile:
‘I’ll give it to you on one condition. If she lets you have this reward you were
speaking of; you’ve got to let me know. No cheating, mind!’
Trinket received the handkerchief with eager assurances that he would be informed
of the outcome, and having seen him out of the Garden, went back again to look for
Crimson.

*

Our narrative returns now to Bao-yu.
After disposing of Jia Yun, Bao-yu continued to feel ex?tremely lethargic and lay back
on the bed with every appear?ance of being about to doze off to sleep. Aroma
hurried over to him and, sitting on the edge of the bed, roused him with a shake:
‘Come on! Surely you are not going to sleep again? You need some fresh air. Why
don’t you go outside and walk around for a bit?’
Bao-yu took her by the hand and smiled at her.
‘I’d like to go,’ he said, ‘but I don’t want to leave you.’
‘Silly!’ said Aroma with a laugh. ‘Don’t say what you don’t mean!’
She hoicked him to his feet.
‘Well, where am I going to go then?’ said Bao-yu. ‘I just feel so bored.’
‘Never mind where, just go out!’ said Aroma. ‘If you stay moping indoors like this,
you’ll get even more bored.’
Bao-yu followed her advice, albeit half-heartedly, and went out into the courtyard.
After visiting the cages in the gallery and playing for a bit with the birds, he ambled
out of the courtyard into the Garden and along the batik of Drenched Blossoms
Stream, pausing for a while to look at the goldfish in the water. As he did so, a pair of
fawns came running like the wind from the hillside opposite. Bao-yu was puzzled.
There seemed to be no reason for their mysterious terror. But just then little Jia Lan
came running down the same slope after them, a tiny bow clutched in his hand.
Seeing his uncle ahead of him, he stood politely to attention and greeted him
cheerfully:
‘Hello, Uncle. I didn’t know you were at home. I thought you’d gone out.’
‘Mischievous little blighter, aren’t you?’ said Bao-yu. ‘What do you want to go
shooting them for, poor little things?’
‘I’ve got no reading to do today,’ said Jia Lan, ‘and I don’t like to hang about doing
nothing, so I thought I’d practise my archery and equitation.’
‘Goodness! You’d better not waste time jawing, then,’ said Bao-yu, and left the
young toxophilite to his pursuits.
Moving on, without much thinking where he was going, he came presently to the
gate of a courtyard.
Denser than feathers on the phoenix’ tail
The stirred leaves murmured with a pent dragon’s moan.
The multitudinous bamboos and the board above the gate confirmed that his feet
had, without conscious direction, carried him to the Naiad’s House. Of their own
accord they now carried him through the gateway and into the courtyard.
The House seemed silent and deserted, its bamboo door-blind hanging unrolled to
the ground; but as he approached the window, he detected a faint sweetness in the
air, traceable to a thin curl of incense smoke which drifted out through the green
gauze of the casement. He pressed his face to the gauze; but before his eyes could
distinguish anything, his ear became aware of a long, languorous sigh and the sound
of a voice speaking:
‘Each day in a drowsy waking dream of love.’
Bao-yu felt a sudden yearning for the speaker. He could see her now. It was Dai-yu, of
course, lying on her bed, stretching herself and yawning luxuriously.
He laughed:
‘Why “each day in a drowsy waking dream of love”?’ he asked through the window
(the words were from his beloved Western Chamber); then going to the doorway he
lifted up the door-blind and walked into the room.
Dai-yu realized that she had been caught off her guard. She covered her burning face
with her sleeve, and turning over towards the wall, pretended to be asleep. Bao-yu
went over intending to turn her back again, but just at that moment Dai-yu’s old
wet-nurse came hurrying in with two other old women at her heels:
‘Miss Lin’s asleep, sir. Would you mind coming back again after she’s woken up?’
Dai-yu at once turned over and sat up with a laugh:
‘Who’s asleep?’
The three old women laughed apologetically.
‘Sorry, miss. We thought you were asleep. Nightingale! Come inside now! Your
mistress is awake.’
Having shouted for Nightingale, the three guardians of morality retired.
‘What do you mean by coming into people’s rooms when they’re asleep?’ said
Dai-yu, smiling up at Bao-yu as she sat on the bed’s edge patting her hair into shape.
At the sight of those soft cheeks so adorably flushed and the starry eyes a little
misted with sleep a wave of emotion passed over him. He sank into a chair and
smiled back at her:
‘What was that you were saying just now before I came in?’
‘I didn’t say anything,’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-yu laughed and snapped his fingers at her:
‘Put that on your tongue, girl! I heard you say it.’ While they were talking to one
another, Nightingale came in.
‘Nightingale,’ said Bao-yu, ‘what about a cup of that excellent tea of yours?’
‘Excellent tea?’ said Nightingale. ‘There’s nothing very special about the tea we
drink here. If nothing but the best will do, you’d better wait for Aroma to come.’
‘Never mind about him!’ said Dai-yu. ‘First go and get me some water!’
‘He is our guest,’ said Nightingale. ‘I can’t fetch you any water until I’ve given him
his tea.’ And she went to pour him a cup.
‘Good girl!’ said Bao-yu.

‘If with your amorous mistress I should wed,
‘Tis you, sweet maid, must make our bridal bed.’

The words, like Dai-yu’s languorous line, were from Western Chamber, but in
somewhat dubious taste. Dai-yu was dreadfully offended by them. In an instant the
smile had vanished from her face.
‘What was that you said?’ He laughed:
‘I didn’t say anything.’ Dai-yu began to cry.
‘This is your latest amusement, I suppose. Every time you hear some coarse
expression outside or read some crude, disgusting book, you have to come back here
and give me the benefit of it. I am to become a source of entertainment for the
menfolk now, it seems.’
She rose, weeping, from the bed and went outside. Bao-yu followed her in alarm.
‘Dearest coz, it was very wrong of me to say that, but it just slipped out without
thinking. Please don’t go and tell! I promise never to say anything like that again.
May my mouth rot and my tongue decay if I do!’
Just at that moment Aroma came hurrying up:
‘Quick!’ she said. ‘You must come back and change. The Master wants to see you.’
The descent of this thunderbolt drove all else from his mind and he rushed off in a
panic. As soon as he had changed, he hurried out of the Garden. Tealeaf was waiting
for him outside the inner gate.
‘I suppose you don’t know what he wants to see me about?’ Bao-yu asked him.
‘I should hurry up, if I were you,’ said Tealeaf. ‘All I know is that he wants to see you.
You’ll find out why soon enough when you get there.’
He hustled him along as he spoke.
They had passed round the main hall, Bao-yu still in a state of fluttering
apprehensiveness when there was a loud guffaw from a corner of the wall. It was Xue
Pan, clapping his hands and stamping his feet in mirth.
‘Ho! Ho! Ho! You’d never have come this quickly if you hadn’t been told that Uncle
wanted you!’
Tealeaf, also laughing, fell on his knees. Bao-yu stood there looking puzzled. It was
some moments before it dawned on him that he had been hoaxed. Xue Pan was by
this time being apologetic — bowing repeatedly and pumping his hands to show how
sorry he was:
‘Don’t blame the lad!’ he said. ‘It wasn’t his fault. I talked him into it.’
Bao-yu saw that he could do nothing, and might as well accept with a good grace.
‘I don’t mind being made a fool of,’ he said, ‘but I think it was going a bit far to
bring my father into it. I think perhaps I’d better tell Aunt Xue and see what she
thinks about it all.’
‘Now look here, old chap,’ said Xue Pan, getting agitated, ‘it was only because I
wanted to fetch you out a bit quicker. I admit it was very wrong of me to make free
with your Parent, but after all, you’ve only got to mention my father next time you
want to fool me and we’ll be quits!’
‘Aiyo!’ said Bao-yu. ‘Worse and worse!’ He turned to Tealeaf: ‘Treacherous little
beast! What are you still kneeling for?’
Tealeaf kotowed and rose to his feet.
‘Look,’ said Xue Pan. ‘I wouldn’t have troubled you other?wise, only it’s my birthday
on the third of next month and old Hu and old Cheng and a couple of the others, I
don’t know where they got them from but they’ve given me:
a piece of fresh lotus root, ever so crisp and crunchy, as thick as that, look, and as
long as that;
a huge great melon, look, as big as that;
a freshly-caught sturgeon as big as that;
and a cypress-smoked Siamese sucking-pig as big as that that came in the tribute
from Siam.
Don’t you think it was clever of them to get me those things? Maybe not so much the
sturgeon and the sucking-pig. They’re just expensive. But where would you go to get
a piece of lotus root or a melon like that? However did they get them to grow so big?
I’ve given some of the stuff to Mother, and while I was about it I sent some round to
your grandmother and Auntie Wang, but I’ve still got a lot left over. I can’t eat it all
myself: it would be unlucky. But apart from me, the only person I can think of who is
worthy to eat a present like this is you. That’s why I came over specially to invite you.
And we’re lucky, because we’ve got a little chap who sings coming round as well. So
you and I will be able to sit down and make a day of it, eh? Really enjoy ourselves.’
Xue Pan, still talking, conducted Bao-yu to his ‘study’, where Zhan Guang, Cheng
Ri-xing, Hu Si-lai and Dan Ping-ren (the four donors of the feast) and the young singer
he had mentioned were already waiting. They rose to welcome Bao-yu as he entered.
When the bowings and courtesies were over and tea had been taken, Xue Pan called
for his servants to lay. A tremendous bustle ensued, which seemed to go on for quite
a long time before everything was finally ready and the diners were able to take their
places at the table.
Bao-yu noticed sliced melon and lotus root among the dishes, both of unusual quality
and size.
‘It seems wrong to be sharing your presents with you before I have given you
anything myself,’ he said jokingly.
‘Yes,’ said Xue Pan. ‘What are you planning to give me for my birthday next month?
Something new and out of the ordinary, I hope.’
‘I haven’t really got anything much to give you,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Things like money and
food and clothing I don’t want for, but they’re not really mine to give. The only way I
could give you something that would really be mine would be by doing some
calligraphy or painting a picture for you.’
‘Talking of pictures,’ said Xue Pan genially, ‘that’s reminded me. I saw a set of dirty
pictures in someone’s house the other day. They were real beauties. There was a lot
of writing on top that I didn’t pay much attention to, but I did notice the signature. I
think it was “Geng Huang”, the man who painted them. They were really good!’
Bao-yu was puzzled. His knowledge of the masters of painting and calligraphy both
past and present was not inconsiderable, but he had never in all his experience come
across a ‘Geng Huang’. After racking his brains for some moments he suddenly began
to chuckle and called for a writing-brush. A writing-brush having been produced by
one of the servants, he wrote two characters with it in the palm of his hand.
‘Are you quite sure the signature you saw was “Geng Huang”?’ he asked Xue Pan.
‘What do you mean?’ said Xue Pan. ‘Of course I’m sure.’
Bao-yu opened his hand and held it up for Xue Pan to see:
‘You sure it wasn’t these two characters? They are quite similar.’
The others crowded round to look. They all laughed when they saw what he had
written:
‘Yes, it must have been “Tang Yin”. Mr Xue couldn’t have been seeing straight that
day. Ha! Ha! Ha!’
Xue Pan realized that he had made a fool of himself, but passed it off with an
embarrassed laugh:
‘Oh, Tankin’ or wankin’,’ he said, ‘what difference does it make, anyway?’
Just then ‘Mr Feng’ was announced by one of the servants, which Bao-yu knew could
only mean General Feng Tang’s son, Feng Zi-ying. Xue Pan and the rest told the boy
to bring him in immediately, but Feng Zi-ying was already striding in, talking and
laughing as he went. The others hurriedly rose and invited him to take a seat.
‘Ha!’ said Feng Zi-ying. ‘No need to go out then. Enjoyin’ yourselves at home, eh?
Very nice too!’
‘It’s a long time since we’ve seen you around,’ said Bao-yu. ‘How’s the General?’
‘Fahver’s in good health, thank you very much,’ said Feng Zi-ying, ‘but Muvver
hasn’t been too well lately. Caught a chill or somethin’.’
Observing with glee that Feng Zi-ying was sporting a black eye, Xue Pan asked him
how he had come by it:
‘Been having a dust-up, then? Who was it this time? Looks as if he left his
signature!’
Feng Zi-ying laughed:
‘Don’t use the mitts any more nowadays — not since that time I laid into Colonel
Chou’s son and did him an injury. That was a lesson to me. I’ve learned to keep my
temper since then. No, this happened the other day durin’ a huntin’ ex?pedition in
the Iron Net Mountains. I got flicked by a gos?hawk’s wing.’
‘When was this?’ Bao-yu asked him.
‘We left on the twenty-eighth of last month,’ said Feng Zi-ying. ‘Didn’t get back till a
few days ago.’
‘Ah, that explains why I didn’t see you at Shen’s party earlier this month,’ said
Bao-yu. ‘I meant at the time to ask why you weren’t there, but I forgot. Did you go
alone on this expedition or was the General there with you?’
‘Fahver most certainly was there,’ said Feng Zi-ying. ‘I was practically dragged along
in tow. Do you think I’m mad enough to go rushin’ off in pursuit of hideous hardships
when I could be sittin’ comfortably at home eatin’ good food and drinkin’ good wine
and listenin’ to the odd song or two? Still, some good came of it. It was a lucky
accident.’
As he had now finished his tea, Xue Pan urged him to join them at table and tell them
his story at leisure, but Feng Zi-?ying rose to his feet again and declined.
‘I ought by rights to stay and drink a few cups with you,’ he said, ‘but there’s
somethin’ very important I’ve got to see Fahver about now, so I’m afraid I really must
refuse.’
But Xue Pan, Bao-yu and the rest were by no means content to let him get away with
this excuse and propelled him insistently towards the table.
‘Now look here, this is too bad!’ Feng Zi-ying good-hum?ouredly protested. ‘All the
years we’ve been knockin’ around togevver we’ve never before insisted that a fellow
should have to stay if he don’t want to. The fact is, I really can’t. Oh well, if I must
have a drink, fetch some decent-sized cups and I’ll just put down a couple of quick
ones!’
This was dearly the most he would concede and the others perforce acquiesced. Two
sconce-cups were brought and ceremoniously filled, Bao-yu holding the cups and Xue
Pan pouring from the wine-kettle. Feng Zi-ying drank them standing, one after the
other, each in a single breath.
‘Now come on,’ said Bao-yu, ‘let’s hear about this “lucky accident” before you go!’
Feng Zi-ying laughed:
‘Couldn’t tell it properly just now,’ he said. ‘It’s somethin’ that needs a special party
all to itself. I’ll invite you all round to my place another day and you shall have the
details then. There’s a favour I want to ask too, by the bye, so we’ll be able to talk
about that then as well.’
He made a determined movement towards the door.
‘Now you’ve got us all peeing ourselves with curiosity!’ said Xue Pan. ‘You might at
least tell us when this party is going to be, to put us out of our suspense.’
‘Not more than ten days’ time and not less than eight,’ said Feng Zi-ying; and going
out into the courtyard, he jumped on his horse and clattered away.
Having seen him off, the others went in again, reseated themselves at table, and
resumed their potations. When the party finally broke up, Bao-yu returned to the
Garden in a state of cheerful inebriation. Aroma, who had had no idea what the
summons from Jia Zheng might portend and was still wondering anxiously what had
become of him, at once demanded to know the cause of his condition. He gave her a
full account of what had happened.
‘Well really!’ said Aroma. ‘Here were we practically beside ourselves with anxiety,
and all the time you were there enjoying yourself! You might at least have sent word
to let us know you were all right.’
‘I was going to send word,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Of course I was. But then old Feng arrived
and it put it out of my mind,’
At that moment Bao-chai walked in, all smiles.
‘I hear you’ve made a start on the famous present,’ she said.
‘But surely you and your family must have had some al?ready ?’ said Bao-yu.
Bao-chai shook her head:
‘Pan was very pressing that I should have some, but I refused. I told him to save it
for other people. I know I’m not really the right sort of person for such superior
delicacies. If I were to eat any, I should be afraid of some frightful nemesis overtaking
me.’
A maid poured tea for her as she spoke, and conversation of a desultory kind
proceeded between sips.

*
Our narrative returns now to Dai-yu.
Having been present when Bao-yu received his summons, Dai-yu, too, was greatly
worried about him - the more so as the day advanced and he had still not returned.
Then in the evening, some time after dinner, she heard that he had just got back and
resolved to go over and ask him exactly what had happened. She was sauntering
along on the way there when she caught sight of Bao-chai some distance ahead of
her, just entering Bao-yu’s courtyard. Continuing to amble on, she came presently to
Drenched Blossoms Bridge, from which a large number of different kinds of fish were
to be seen swimming about in the water below. Dai-yu did not know what kinds of
fish they were, but they were so beautiful that she had to stop and admire them, and
by the time she reached the House of Green Delights, the courtyard gate had been
shut for the night and she was obliged to knock for ad?mittance.
Now it so happened that Skybright had just been having a quarrel with Emerald, and
being thoroughly out of temper, was venting some of her ill-humour on the lately
arrived Bao-chai, complaining sotto voce behind her back about ‘people who were
always inventing excuses to come dropping in and who kept other people staying up
half the night when they would like to be in bed’. A knock at the gate coming in the
midst of these resentful mutterings was enough to make her really angry.
‘They’ve all gone to bed,’ she shouted, not even bothering to inquire who the caller
was. ‘Come again tomorrow!’
Dai-yu was aware that Bao-yu’s maids often played tricks on one another, and it
occurred to her that the girl in the courtyard, not recognizing her voice, might have
mistaken her for another maid and be keeping her locked out for a joke. She
therefore called out again, this time somewhat louder than before:
‘Come on! Open up, please! It’s me.’
Unfortunately Skybright had still not recognized the voice.
‘I don’t care who you are,’ she replied bad-temperedly. ‘Master Bao’s orders are
that I’m not to let anyone in.’
Dumbfounded by her insolence, Dai-yu stood outside the gate in silence. She could
not, however much she felt like it, give vent to her anger in noisy expostulation.
‘Although they are always telling me to treat my Uncle’s house as my own,’ she
reflected, ‘I am still really an outsider. And now that Mother and Father are both
dead and I am on my own, to make a fuss about a thing like this when I am living in
some?one else’s house could only lead to further unpleasantness.’
A big tear coursed, unregarded, down her cheek.
She was still standing there irresolute, unable to decide whether to go or stay, when
a sudden volley of talk and laughter reached her from inside. It resolved itself, as she
listened attentively, into the voices of Bao-yu and Bao-chai. An even bitterer sense of
chagrin took possession of her. Suddenly, as she hunted in her mind for some
possible reason for her exclusion, she remembered the events of the morning and
concluded that Bao-yu must think she had told on him to his parents and was
punishing her for her betrayal.
‘But I would never betray you!’ she expostulated with him in her mind. ‘Why
couldn’t you have asked first, before letting your resentment carry you to such
lengths? If you won’t see me today, does that mean that from now on we are going
to stop seeing each other altogether?’
The more she thought about it the more distressed she became.

Chill was the green moss pearled with dew
And chill was the wind in the avenue;

but Dai-yu, all unmindful of the unwholesome damp, had withdrawn into the shadow
of a flowering fruit-tree by the corner of the wall, and grieving now in real earnest,
began to cry as though her heart would break. And as if Nature herself were affected
by the grief of so beautiful a creature, the crows who had been roosting in the trees
round about flew up with a great commotion and removed themselves to another
part of the Garden, unable to endure the sorrow of her weeping.

Teats filled each flower and grief their hearts perturbed,
And silly birds were from their nests disturbed.

The author of the preceding couplet has given us a quatrain in much the same vein:

Few in this world fair Frowner’s looks surpassed,
None matched her store of sweetness unexpressed.
The first sob scarcely from her lips had passed
When blossoms fell and birds flew off distressed.

As Dai-yu continued weeping there alone, the courtyard door suddenly opened with
a loud creak and someone came out.
But in order to find out who it was, you will have to wait for the next volume.

EXPLICIT PRIMA PARS LAIDIS HISTORIAE




CHAPTER 27

Beauty Perspiring sports with butterflies
by the Raindrop Pavilion
And Beauty Suspiring weeps for fallen blossoms
by the Flowers’ Grave

TO CONTINUE OUR STORY,

As Dai-yu stood there weeping, there was a sudden creak of the courtyard gate and
Bao-chai walked out, accompanied by Bao-yu with Aroma and a bevy of other maids
who had come out to see her off. Dai-yu was on the point of stepping forward to
question Bao-yu, but shrank from embarrassing him in front of so many people.
Instead she slipped back into the shadows to let Bao-chai pass, emerging only when
Bao-yu and the rest were back inside and the gate was once more barred. She stood
for a while facing it, and shed a few silent tears; then, realizing that it was pointless
to remain standing there, she turned and went back to her room and began, in a
listless, mechanical manner, to take off her ornaments and prepare herself for the
night.
Nightingale and Snowgoose had long since become habitu?ated to Dai-yu’s moody
temperament; they were used to her unaccountable fits of depression, when she
would sit, the picture of misery, in gloomy silence broken only by an occasional gusty
sigh, and to her mysterious, perpetual weeping, that was occasioned by no
observable cause. At first they had tried to reason with her, or, imagining that she
must be grieving for her parents or that she was feeling homesick or had been upset
by some unkindness, they would do their best to comfort her. But as the months
lengthened into years and she still continued exactly the same as before, they
gradually became accustomed and no longer sought reasons for her behaviour. That
was why they ignored her on this occasion and left her alone to her misery,
remaining where they were in the outer room and continuing to occupy themselves
with their own affairs.
She sat, motionless as a statue, leaning against the back of the bed, her hands
clasped about her knees, her eyes full of tears. It had already been dark for some
hours when she finally lay down to sleep.
Our story passes over the rest of that night in silence.

*

Next day was the twenty-sixth of the fourth month, the day on which, this year, the
festival of Grain in Ear was due to fall. To be precise, the festival’s official
commencement was on the twenty-sixth day of the fourth month at two o’clock in
the afternoon. It has been the custom from time immemorial to make offerings to
the flower fairies on this day. For Grain in Ear marks the beginning of summer; it is
about this time that the blossom begins to fail; and tradition has it that the
flower-spirits, their work now completed, go away on this day and do not return until
the following year. The offerings are therefore thought of as a sort of farewell party
for the flowers.
This charming custom of ‘speeding the fairies’ is a special favourite with the fair sex,
and in Prospect Garden all the girls were up betimes on this day making little coaches
and palan?quins out of willow-twigs and flowers and little banners and pennants
from scraps of brocade and any other pretty material they could find, which they
fastened with threads of coloured silk to the tops of flowering trees and shrubs. Soon
every plant and tree was decorated and the whole garden had become a shimmering
sea of nodding blossoms and fluttering coloured streamers. Moving about in the
midst of it all, the girls in their brilliant summer dresses, beside which the most vivid
hues of plant and plumage became faint with envy, added the final touch of
brightness to a scene of indescribable gaiety and colour.
All the young people — Bao-chai, Ying-chun, Tan-chun, Xi?chun, Li Wan, Xi-feng and
her little girl and Caltrop, and all the maids from all the different apartments — were
outside in the Garden enjoying themselves — all, that is, except Dai-yi, whose
absence, beginning to be noticed, was first commented on by Ying-chun:
‘What’s happened to Cousin Lin? Lazy girl! Surely she can’t still be in bed at this
hour?’
Bao-chai volunteered to go and fetch her:
‘The rest of you wait here; I’ll go and rout her out for you,’ she said; and breaking
away from the others, she made off in the direction of the Naiad’s House.
While she was on her way, she caught sight of élégante and the eleven other little
actresses, evidently on their way to join in the fun. They came up and greeted her,
and for a while she stood and chatted with them. As she was leaving them, she
turned back and pointed in the direction from which she had just come:
‘You’ll find the others somewhere over there,’ she said. ‘I’m on my way to get Miss
Lin. I’ll join the rest of you presently.’
She continued, by the circuitous route that the garden’s con?tours obliged her to take,
on her way to the Naiad’s House. Raising her eyes as she approached it, she suddenly
became aware that the figure ahead of her just disappearing inside it was Bao-yu.
She stopped and lowered her eyes pensively again to the ground.
‘Bao-yu and Dai-yu have known each other since they were little,’ she reflected.
‘They are used to behaving uninhibitedly when they are alone together. They don’t
seem to care what they say to one another; and one is never quite sure what sort of
mood one is going to find them in. And Dai-yu, at the best of times, is always so
touchy and suspicious. If I go in now after him, he is sure to feel embarrassed and she
is sure to start imagining things. It would be better to go back without seeing her.’
Her mind made up, she turned round and began to retrace her steps, intending to go
back to the other girls; but just at that moment she noticed two enormous
turquoise-coloured butterflies a little way ahead of her, each as large as a child’s fan,
fluttering and dancing on the breeze. She watched them fascinated and thought she
would like to play a game with them. Taking a fan from inside her sleeve and holding
it outspread of her, she followed them off the path and into the grass.
To and fro fluttered the pair of butterflies, sometimes alight?ing for a moment, but
always flying off again before she could reach them. Once they seemed on the point
of flying across the little river that flowed through the midst of the garden and
Bao-chai had to stalk them with bated breath for fear of start?ling them out on to the
water. By the time she had reached the Raindrop Pavilion she was perspiring freely
and her interest in the butterflies was beginning to evaporate. She was about to turn
back when she became aware of a low murmur of voices coming from inside the
pavilion.
Raindrop Pavilion was built in such a way that it projected into the middle of the pool
into which the little watercourse widened out at this point, so that on three of its
sides it looked out on to the water. It was surrounded by a verandah, whose railing
followed the many angles formed by the bays and projections of the base. In each of
its wooden walls there was a large paper-covered casement of elegantly patterned
lattice-work.
Hearing voices inside the pavilion, Bao-chai halted and in?clined her ear to listen.
‘Are you sure this is your handkerchief?’ one of the voices was saying. ‘If it is, take it;
but if it isn’t, I must return it to Mr Yun.’
‘Of course it’s mine,’ said the second voice. ‘Come on, let me have it!’
‘Are you going to give me a reward? I hope I haven’t taken all this trouble for
nothing.’
‘I promised you I would give you a reward, and so I shall. Surely you don’t think I
was deceiving you?’
‘All right, I get a reward for bringing it to you. But what about the person who
picked it up? Doesn’t he get anything?’
‘Don’t talk nonsense,’ said the second voice. ‘He’s one of the masters. A master
picking up something belonging to one of us should give it back as a matter of course.
How can there be any question of rewarding him?’
‘If you don’t intend to reward him, what am I supposed to tell him when I see him?
He was most insistent that I wasn’t to give you the handkerchief unless you gave him
a reward.’ There was a long pause, after which the second voice re?plied:
‘Oh, all right. Let him have this other handkerchief of mine then. That will have to
do as his reward - But you must swear a solemn oath not to tell anyone else about
this.’
‘May my mouth rot and may I die a horrible death if I ever tell anyone else about
this, amen!’ said the first voice.
‘Goodness!’ said the second voice again. ‘Here we are talk?ing away, and all the
time someone could be creeping up out?side and listening to every word we say. We
had better open these casements; then even if anyone outside sees us, they’ll think
we are having an ordinary conversation; and we shall be able to see them and know
in time when to stop.’
Bao-chai, listening outside, gave a start.
‘No wonder they say “venery and thievery sharpen the wits”,’ she thought. ‘If they
open those windows and see me here, they are going to feel terribly embarrassed.
And one of those voices sounds like that proud, peculiar girl Crimson who works in
Bao-yu’s room. If a girl like that knows that I have overheard her doing something she
shouldn’t be doing, it will be a case of “the desperate dog will jump a wall, the
desperate man will hazard all”: there’ll be a great deal of trouble and I shall be
involved in it. There isn’t time to hide. I shall have to do as the cicada does when he
jumps out of his skin: give them something to put them off the scent—’
There was a loud creak as the casement yielded. Bao-chai advanced with deliberately
noisy tread.
‘Frowner!’ she called out gaily. ‘I know where you’re hid?ing.’
Inside the pavilion Crimson and Trinket, who heard her say this and saw her
advancing towards them just as they were opening the casement, were speechless
with amazement; but Bao-chai ignored their confusion and addressed them genially:
‘Have you two got Miss Lin hidden away in there?’
‘I haven’t seen Miss Lin,’ said Trinket.
‘I saw her just now from the river-bank,’ said Bao-chai. ‘She was squatting down
over here playing with something in the water. I was going to creep up and surprise
her, but she spotted me before I could get up to her and disappeared round this
corner. Are you sure she’s not hiding in there?’
She made a point of going inside the pavilion and searching; then, coming out again,
she said in a voice loud enough for them to hear:
‘If she’s not in the pavilion, she must have crept into that grotto. Oh well, if she’s
not afraid of being bitten by a snake — !’
As she walked away she laughed inwardly at the ease with which she had extricated
herself from a difficult situation.
‘I think I’m fairly safely out of that one,’ she thought. ‘I wonder what those two will
make of it.’
What indeed! Crimson believed every word that Bao-chai had said, and as soon as
the latter was at a distance, she seized hold of Trinket in alarm:
‘Oh, how terrible! If Miss Lin was squatting there, she must have heard what we
said before she went away.’
Her companion was silent.
‘Oh dear! What do you think she’ll do?’ said Crimson.
‘Well, suppose she did hear,’ said Trinket, ‘it’s not her backache. If we mind our
business and she minds hers, there’s no reason why anything should come of it.’
‘If it were Miss Bao that had heard us, I don’t suppose anything would,’ said
Crimson; ‘but Miss Lin is so critical and so intolerant. If she heard it and it gets about
— oh dear!’
But just at that moment Caltrop, Advent, Chess and Scribe were seen approaching
the pavilion, and Crimson and Trinket had to drop the subject in a hurry and join in a
general conversation. Crimson noticed Xi-feng standing half-way up the rockery
above the little grotto, beckoning. Breaking away from the others, she bounded up to
her with a smiling face:
‘What can I do for you, madam?’
Xi-feng ran an appraising eye over her. A neat, pretty, pleasantly-spoken girl, she
decided, and smiled at her graciously:
‘I have come here without my maids and need someone to a message back to my
apartment. I wonder if you are clever enough to get it right.’
‘Tell me the message, madam. If I don’t get it right and make a mess of it, it will be
up to you to punish me.’
‘Which of the young ladies do you work for?’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’d better know, so that I
can explain to her if she asks for you while you are doing my errand.’
‘I work for Master Bao,’ said Crimson.
Xi-feng laughed.
‘Ah ha! You work for Master Bao. No wonder. Very well, then, if he asks for you
while you are away, I shall explain. I want you to go to my apartment and tell
Patience that there is a roll of money under the stand of the Ru-ware dish on the
table in the outside room. There are a hundred and twenty taels of silver in it to pay
the embroiderers with. Tell her that when Zhang Cai’s wife comes for it, she is to
weigh it out in front of her before handing it over. And there’s one other thing.
There’s a little purse at the head of the bed in my inside room. I want you to bring it
to me.’
‘Yes madam,’ said Crimson, and hurried off.
Returning shortly afterwards, she found that Xi-feng was no longer on the rockery;
but Chess had just emerged from the little grotto beneath it and was standing there
doing up her sash. Crimson ran down to speak to her:
‘Excuse me, did you see where Mrs Lian went to?’
‘’Fraid I didn’t notice,’ said Chess.
Crimson looked around her. Bao-chai and Tan-chun were standing at the edge of the
pool looking at the fish. She went up to them:
‘Excuse me, does either of you young ladies happen to know where Mrs Lian went
to just now, please?’
‘Try Mrs Zhu’s place,’ said Tan-chun.
Crimson hurried off in the direction of Sweet-rice Village. On her way she ran
head-on into a party of maids consisting of Skybright, Mackerel, Emerald, Ripple,
Musk, Scribe, Pic?ture and Oriole.
‘Here, what are you gadding about like this for?’ said Sky?bright as soon as she saw
who it was. ‘The flowers want watering; the birds need feeding; the stove for the
tea-water needs seeing to. You’ve no business to go wandering around outside!’
‘Master Bao gave orders yesterday that the flowers were only to be watered every
other day,’ said Crimson. ‘I fed the birds when you were still fast asleep in bed.’
‘What about the stove?’ said Emerald.
‘It isn’t my day for the stove,’ said Crimson. ‘The tea-water today has nothing to do
with me.’
‘Listen to Miss Pert!’ said Mackerel. ‘I wouldn’t bother about her, if I were you —
just leave her to wander about as she pleases.’
‘I’m not “wandering about”, if you really want to know,’ said Crimson. ‘If you really
want to know, Mrs Lian sent me outside to take a message and to fetch something
for her.’
She held up the purse for them to see; at which they were silent. But when they had
passed each other, Skybright laughed sneeringly:
‘You can see why she’s so uppity. She’s on the climb again. Look at her — all
cock-a-hoop because someone’s given her a little message to carry! And she probably
doesn’t even know who it’s about. Well, one little message isn’t going to get her very
far. It’s what happens in the long run that counts. Now if she were clever enough to
climb her way right out of this Garden and stay there, that would be really
something!’
These words were spoken for Crimson to hear, but in such a way that she was unable
to answer them. She had to swallow her anger and hurry on to look for Xi-feng.
Xi-feng was in Li Wan’s room, as Tan-chun had predicted, and Crimson found the two
of them in conversation. She went up to Xi-feng and delivered her message:
‘Patience says that she found the silver just after you had gone and took care of it;
and she says that when Zhang Cai’s wife came for it she did weigh it out in front of
her before giving it to her to take away.’
Crimson now produced the purse and handed it to Xi-feng.
Then she added:
‘Patience told me to tell you that Brightie has just been in to inquire what your
instructions were for his visit, and she said that she gave him a message to take
based on the things she thought you would want him to say.’
‘Oh?’ said Xi-feng, amused. ‘And what was this message “based on the things she
thought I would want him to say”?’
‘She said he was to tell them: “Our lady hopes your lady is well and she says that
the Master is away at present and may not be back for another day or two, but your
lady is not to worry; and when the lady from West Lane is better, our lady will come
with their lady to see your lady. And our lady says that the lady from West Lane sent
someone the other day with a message from the elder Lady Wang saying that she
hopes our lady is well and will she please see if our Lady Wang can let her have a few
of her Golden Myriad Macrobiotic Pills; and if she can, will our lady please send
someone with them to her, because someone will be going from there to the elder
Lady Wang’s in a few days’ time and they will be able to take them for her — ”’
Crimson was still in full spate when Li Wan interrupted her with a laugh:
‘What an extraordinary number of “ladies”! I hope you can understand what it’s all
about, Feng. I’m sure I can’t!’
‘I’m not surprised,’ said Xi-feng. ‘There are four or five different households
involved in that message.’ She smiled graciously at Crimson. ‘You’re a clever girl, my
dear, to have got it all right — not like the simpering little ninnies I usually have to
put up with. You have no idea, cousin,’ she said, turn?ing to Li Wan again. ‘Apart from
the one or two girls and one or two older women that I always keep about me, I just
dread talking to servants nowadays. They take such an inter?minable time to tell you
anything — so long-winded! And the airs and graces they give themselves! and the
simpering! and the urn-ing and ah-ing! If they only knew how it makes me fume! Our
Patience used to be like that when she first came to me. I used to say to her, “Do you
think it makes you seem glamorous, all that affected humming? — like a little gnat!” I
had to talk to her several times about it before she would mend her ways.’
Li Wan laughed.
‘I suppose if they were all peppercorns like you, it would be all right.’
‘This girl’s all right,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Those two messages she gave me just now may
not have been very long ones, but you could see how clear-cut her delivery of them
was.’
She smiled at Crimson again.
‘How would you like to come and work for me and be my god-daughter? With a
little grooming from me you could go far.’
Crimson suppressed a giggle.
‘Why do you laugh?’ said Xi-feng. ‘I suppose you think I’m too young to be your
god-mother. You’re very silly if you think that. You just ask around a bit: there are
plenty much older than you who’d give their ears to be my god-daughter. What I’m
offering you is a very special favour.’
Crimson smiled.
‘I wasn’t laughing because of that, madam. I was laughing because you had got the
generation wrong. My mother is your god-daughter already. If you made me your
god-daughter too, I should be my own mother’s sister!’
‘Who is your mother?’ said Xi-feng.
‘Do you mean to say that you don’t know who this girl is that you’ve been talking to
all this time?’ said Li Wan. ‘This is Lin Zhi-xiao’s daughter.’
Xi-feng registered surprise:
‘You mean to tell me that this is the Lins’ daughter?’ She laughed. ‘That couple of
old sticks? I can never get a peep out of either of them. I’ve always maintained that
Lin Zhi-xiao and his wife were the perfect match: one hears nothing and the other
says nothing. Well! To think they should have produced a bright little thing like this
between them! — How old are you?’ she asked Crimson.
‘Sixteen.’
‘And what’s your name?’
‘“Crimson”, madam. I used to be called “Jade”, but they made me change it on
account of Master Bao.’
Xi-feng looked away with a frown of displeasure.
‘I should think so too,’ she muttered. ‘Odious people! One can hear them saying it:
“We’ve got a ‘Jade’ in our family the same as you”, or some such impertinence.’
She turned to Li Wan again:
‘I don’t think you know, Wan, but I told this girl’s mother that as Lai Da’s wife is so
busy nowadays that she doesn’t even know who half the girls in the household are
any longer, I wanted her to pick out a couple of likely-looking girls to work under me.
Now she promised that she would do this; but you see, not only has she not done so,
but she’s actually gone and sent her own daughter to work for someone else. Do you
suppose she really thinks her girl would have had such a ter?rible time with me?’
‘Don’t be so touchy,’ said Li Wan. ‘Her mother is not to blame. The girl had already
started service in the Garden before you ever spoke to her about it.’
‘Oh well, in that case,’ said Xi-feng, recovering her good humour, ‘I’ll have a word
with Bao-yu about it tomorrow. I’ll tell him to find someone else and let me have this
girl to work under me. Still — ’ she turned to Crimson, ‘perhaps we ought to ask the
party most concerned if she is willing.’
Crimson smiled.
‘As to being willing or not, madam, I don’t think it’s my place to say. But I do know
this: that if I was to work for you, I should get to know what’s what and all the inside
and out?side of household management. I’m sure it would be wonder?ful
experience.’
Just then a maid arrived from Lady Wang’s asking for Xi?-feng, who promptly excused
herself to Li Wan and left. Crimson returned to Green Delights — where our story
now leaves her.

*

We now return to Dai-yu, who, having slept so little the night before, was very late
getting up on the morning of the festival. Hearing that the other girls were all out in
the garden ‘speeding the fairies’ and fearing to be teased by them for her lazy habits,
she hurried over her toilet and went out as soon as it was completed. A smiling
Bao-yu appeared in the gateway as she was stepping down into the courtyard.
‘Well, coz,’ he said, ‘I hope you didn’t tell on me yesterday. You had me worrying
about it all last night.’
Dai-yu turned back, ignoring him, to address Nightingale inside:
‘When you do the room, leave one of the casements open so that the parent
swallows can get in. And put the lion door?stop on the bottom of the blind to stop it
flapping. And don’t forget to put the cover back on the burner after you’ve lighted
the incense.’
She made her way across the courtyard, still ignoring him. Bao-yu, who knew nothing
of the little drama that had taken place outside his gate the night before, assumed
that she was still angry about his unfortunate lapse earlier on that same day, when
he had offended her susceptibilities with a some?what risqué quotation from The
Western Chamber. He offered her now, with energetic bowing and hand-pumping,
the apologies that the previous day’s emergency had caused him to neglect. But
Dai-yu walked straight past him and out of the gate, not deigning so much as a glance
in his direction, and stalked off in search of the others.
Bao-yu was nonplussed. He began to suspect that something more than he had first
imagined must be wrong.
‘Surely it can’t only be because of yesterday lunchtime that she’s carrying on in this
fashion? There must be something else. On the other hand, I didn’t get back until
late and I didn’t see her again last night, so how could I have offended her?’
Preoccupied with these reflections, he followed her at some distance behind.
Not far ahead Bao-chai and Tan-chun were watching the ungainly courtship dance of
some storks. When they saw Dai?-yu coming, they invited her to join them, and the
three girls stood together and chatted. Then Bao-yu arrived. Tan-chun greeted him
with sisterly concern:
‘How have you been keeping, Bao? It’s three whole days since I saw you last.’
Bao-yu smiled back at her.
‘How have you been keeping, sis? I was asking Cousin Wan about you the day
before yesterday.’
‘Come over here a minute,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I want to talk to you.’
He followed her into the shade of a pomegranate tree a little way apart from the
other two.
‘Has Father asked to see you at all during this last day or two?’ Tan-chun began.
‘No.’
‘I thought I heard someone say yesterday that he had been asking for you.’
‘No,’ said Bao-yu, smiling at her concern. ‘Whoever it was was mistaken. He
certainly hasn’t asked for me.’
Tan-chun smiled and changed the subject.
‘During the past few months,’ she said, ‘I’ve managed to save up another ten
strings or so of cash. I’d like you to take it again like you did last time, and next time
you go out, if you see a nice painting or calligraphic scroll or some amusing little
thing that would do for my room, I’d like you to buy it for me.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Bao-yu. ‘In the trips I make to bazaars and temple fairs,
whether it’s inside the city or round about, I can’t say that I ever see anything really
nice or out of the ordinary. It’s all bronzes and jades and porcelain and that sort of
stuff. Apart from that it’s mostly dress-making materials and clothes and things to
eat.’
‘Now what would I want things like that for?’ said Tan?-chun. ‘No, I mean
something like that little wickerwork basket you bought me last time, or the little box
carved out of bamboo root, or the little clay burner. I thought they were sweet.
Unfortunately the others took such a fancy to them that they carried them off as loot
and wouldn’t give them back to me again.’
‘Oh, if those are the sort of things you want,’ said Bao-yu laughing, ‘it’s very simple.
Just give a few strings of cash to one of the boys and he’ll bring you back a whole
cartload of them.’
‘What do the boys know about it?’ said Tan-chun. ‘I need someone who can pick
out the interesting things and the ones that are in good taste. You get me lots of nice
little things, and I’ll embroider a pair of slippers for you like the ones I made for you
last time — only this time I’ll do them more carefully.’
‘Talking of those slippers reminds me,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I happened to run into Father
once when I was wearing them. He was Most Displeased. When he asked me who
made them, I naturally didn’t dare to tell him that you had, so I said that Aunt Wang
had given them to me as a birthday present a few days before. There wasn’t much he
could do about it when he heard that they came from Aunt Wang; so after a very
long pause he just said, “What a pointless waste of human effort and valuable
material, to produce things like that!” I told this to Aroma when I got back, and she
said, “Oh, that’s nothing! You should have heard your Aunt Zhao complaining about
those slippers. She was furious when she heard about them:
‘Her own natural brother so down at heel he scarcely dares show his face to people,
and she spends her time making things like that!’”’
Tan-chun’s smile had vanished:
‘How can she talk such nonsense? Why should I be the one to make shoes for him?
Huan gets a clothing allowance, doesn’t he? He gets his clothing and footwear
provided for the same as all the test of us. And fancy saying a thing like that in front
of a roomful of servants! For whose benefit was this remark made, I wonder? I make
an occasional pair of slippers just for something to do in my spare time; and if I give a
pair to someone I particularly like, that’s my own affair. Surely no one else has any
business to start telling me who I should give them to? Oh, she’s so petty!’
Bao-yu shook his head:
‘Perhaps you’re being a bit hard on her. She’s probably got her reasons.’
This made Tan-chun really angry. Her chin went up de?fiantly:
‘Now you’re being as stupid as her. Of course she’s got her reasons; but they are
ignorant, stupid reasons. But she can think what she likes: as far as I am concerned,
Sir Jia is my father and Lady Wang is my mother, and who was born in whose room
doesn’t interest me — the way I choose my friends inside the family has nothing to
do with that. Oh, I know I shouldn’t talk about her like this; but she is so idiotic about
these things. As a matter of fact I can give you an even better example than your
story of the slippers. That last time I gave you my savings to get something for me,
she saw me a few days afterwards and started telling me how short of money she
was and how difficult things were for her. I took no notice, of course. But later, when
the maids were out of the room, she began attacking me for giving the money I’d
saved to other people instead of giving it to Huan. Really! I didn’t know whether to
laugh or get angry with her. In the end I just walked out of the room and went round
to see Mother.’
There was an amused interruption at this point from Bao-chai, who was still standing
where they had left her a few minutes before:
‘Do finish your talking and come back soon! It’s easy to see that you two are
brother and sister. As soon as you see each other, you get into a huddle and start
talking about family secrets. Would it really be such a disaster if anything you are
saying were to be overheard?’
Tan-chun and Bao-yu rejoined her, laughing.
Not seeing Dai-yu, Bao-yu realized that she must have slipped off elsewhere while be
was talking.
‘Better leave it a day or two,’ he told himself on reflection. ‘Wait until her anger has
calmed down a bit.’
While he was looking downwards and meditating, he noticed that the ground where
they were standing was car?peted with a bright profusion of wind-blown flowers —
pome?granate and balsam for the most part.
‘You can see she’s upset,’ he thought ruefully. ‘She’s neg?lecting her flowers. I’ll
bury this lot for her and remind her about it next time I see her.’
He became aware that Bao-chai was arranging for him and Tan-chun to go with her
outside.
‘I’ll join you two presently,’ he said, and waited until they were a little way off
before stooping down to gather the fallen blossoms into the skirt of his gown. It was
quite a way from where he was to the place where Dai-yu had buried the
peach-blossom on that previous occasion, but he made his way towards it, over rocks
and bridges and through plantations of trees and flowers. When he had almost
reached his destination and there was only the spur of a miniature ‘mountain’
be?tween him and the burial-place of the flowers, he heard the sound of a voice,
coming from the other side of the rock, whose continuous, gentle chiding was
occasionally broken by the most pitiable and heart-rending sobs.
‘It must be a maid from one of the apartments,’ thought Bao-yu. ‘Someone has
been ill-treating her, and she has run here to cry on her own.’
He stood still and endeavoured to catch what the weeping girl was saying. She
appeared to be reciting something:

The blossoms fade and falling fill the air,
Of fragrance and bright hues bereft and bare.
Floss drifts and flutters round the Maiden’s bower,
Or softly strikes against her curtained door.

The Maid, grieved by these signs of spring’s decease,
Seeking some means her sorrow to express,
Has rake in hand into the garden gone,
Before the fallen flowers are trampled on.

Elm-pods and willow-floss are fragrant too;
Why care, Maid, where the fallen flowers blew?
Next year, when peach and plum-tree bloom again,
Which of your sweet companions will remain?

This spring the heartless swallow built his nest
Beneath the eaves of mud with flowers compressed.
Next year the flowers will blossom as before,
But swallow, nest, and Maid will be no more.

Three hundred and three-score the year’s full tale:
From swords of frost and from the slaughtering gale
How can the lovely flowers long stay intact,
Or, once loosed, from their drifting fate draw back?
Blooming so steadfast, fallen so hard to find!
Beside the flowers’ grave, with sorrowing mind,
The solitary Maid sheds many a tear,
Which on the boughs as bloody drops appear.

At twilight, when the cuckoo sings no more,
The Maiden with her rake goes in at door
And lays her down between the lamplit walls,
While a chill rain against the window falls.

I know not why my heart’s so strangely sad,
Half grieving for the spring and yet half glad:
Glad that it came, grieved it so soon was spent.
So soft it came, so silently it went!

Last night, outside, a mournful sound was heard:
The spirits of the flowers and of the bird.
But neither bird nor flowers would long delay,
Bird lacking speech, and flowers too shy to stay.

And then I wished that I had wings to fly
After the drifting flowers across the sky:
Across the sky to the world’s farthest end,
The flowers’ last fragrant resting-place to find.

But better their remains in silk to lay
And bury underneath the wholesome clay,
Pure substances the pure earth to enrich,
Than leave to soak and stink in some foul ditch.

Can I, that these flowers’ obsequies attend,
Divine how soon or late my life will end?
Let others laugh flower-burial to see:
Another year who will be burying me?

As petals drop and spring begins to fail,
The bloom of youth, too, sickens and turns pale.
One day, when spring has gone and youth has fled.
The Maiden and the flowers will both be dead.

All this was uttered in a voice half-choked with sobs; for the words recited seemed
only to inflame the grief of the reciter — indeed, Bao-yu, listening on the other side
of the rock, was so overcome by them that he had already flung himself weeping
upon the ground.
But the sequel to this painful scene will be told in the follow?ing chapter.




CHAPTER 28

A crimson cummerbund becomes a pledge of friendship
And a chaplet of medicine-beads becomes a source of
embarrassment

ON the night before the festival, it may be remembered, Lin Dai-yu had mistakenly
supposed Bao-yu responsible for Sky-bright’s refusal to open the gate for her. The
ceremonial fare?well to the flowers of the following morning had transformed her
pent-up and still smouldering resentment into a more generalized and seasonable
sorrow. This had finally found its expression in a violent outburst of grief as she was
burying the latest collection of fallen blossoms in her flower-grave. Meditation on the
fate of flowers had led her to a contempla?tion of her own sad and orphaned lot; she
had burst into tears, and soon. after had begun a recitation of the poem whose
words we recorded in the preceding chapter.
Unknown to her, Bao-yu was listening to this recitation from the slope of the near-by
rockery. At first he merely nod?ded and sighed sympathetically; but when he heard
the words

             ‘Can I, that these flowers’ obsequies attend,
               Divine how soon or late my life will end?’

and, a little later,


‘One day when spring has gone and youth has fled,
The Maiden and the flowers will both be dead.’

he flung himself on the ground in a fit of weeping, scattering the earth all about him
with the flowers he had been carrying in the skirt of his gown.
Lin Dai-yu dead! A world from which that delicate, flower?like countenance had
irrevocably departed! It was unutterable anguish to think of it. Yet his sensitized
imagination did now consider it — went on, indeed, to consider a world from which
the others, too — Bao-chai, Caltrop, Aroma and the rest — had also irrevocably
departed. Where would he be then? What would have become of him? And what of
the Garden, the rocks, the flowers, the trees? To whom would they belong when he
and the girls were no longer there to enjoy them? Passing from loss to loss in his
imagination, he plunged deeper and deeper into a grief that seemed inconsolable. As
the poet says:

          Flowers in my eyes and bird-song in my ears
          Augment my loss and mock my bitter tears.

Dai-yu, then, as she stood plunged in her own private sor?rowing, suddenly heard
the sound of another person crying bitterly on the rocks above her.
‘The others are always telling me I’m a “case”,’ she thought. Surely there can’t be
another “case” up there?’
But on looking up she saw that it was Bao-yu.
‘Pshaw!’ she said crossly to herself. ‘I thought it was another girl, but all the time it
was that cruel, hate—’
‘Hateful’ she had been going to say, but clapped her mouth shut before uttering it.
She sighed instead and began to walk away.
By the time Bao-yu’s weeping was over, Dai-yu was no longer there. He realized that
she must have seen him and have gone away in order to avoid him. Feeling suddenly
rather foolish, he rose to his feet and brushed the earth from his clothes. Then he
descended from the rockery and began to retrace his steps in the direction of Green
Delights. Quite by coincidence Dai-yu was walking along the same path a little way
ahead.
‘Stop a minute!’ he cried, hurrying forward to catch up with her. ‘I know you are
not taking any notice of me, but I only want to ask you one simple question, and then
you need never have anything more to do with me.’
Dai-yu had turned back to see who it was. When she saw that it was Bao-yu still, she
was going to ignore him again; but hearing him say that he only wanted to ask her
one ques?tion, she told him that he might do so.
Bao-yu could not resist teasing her a little.
‘How about two questions? Would you wait for two?’
Dai-yu set her face forwards and began walking on again.
Bao-yu sighed.
‘If it has to be like this now,’ he said, as if to himself; ‘it’s a pity it was ever like it
was in the beginning.’
Dai-yu’s curiosity got the better of her. She stopped walk?ing and turned once more
towards him.
‘Like what in the beginning?’ she asked. ‘And like what now?’
‘Oh, the beginning!’ said Bao-yu. ‘In the beginning, when you first came here, I was
your faithful companion in all your games. Anything I had, even the thing most dear
to me, was yours for the asking. If there was something to eat that I specially liked, I
had only to hear that you were fond of it too and I would religiously hoard it away to
share with you when you got back, not daring even to touch it until you came. We
ate at the same table. We slept in the same bed. I used to think that because we
were so close then, there would be something special about our relationship when
we grew up — that even if we weren’t particularly affectionate, we should at least
have more understanding and forbearance for each other than the rest. But how
wrong I was! Now that you have grown up, you seem only to have grown more
touchy. You don’t seem to care about me any more at all. You spend all your time
brood?ing about outsiders like Peng and Chai. I haven’t got any real brothers and
sisters left here now. There are Huan and Tan, of course; but as you know, they’re
only my half-brother and half-sister: they aren’t my mother’s children. I’m on my own,
like you. I should have thought we had so much in common - But what’s the use? I try
and try, but it gets me nowhere; and nobody knows or cares.’
At this point — in spite of himself — he burst into tears.
The palpable evidence of her own eyes and ears had by now wrought a considerable
softening on Dai-yu’s heart. A sym?pathetic tear stole down her own cheek, and she
hung her head and said nothing. Bao-yu could see that he had moved her.
‘I know I’m not much use nowadays,’ he continued, ‘but however bad you may
think me, I would never wittingly do anything in your presence to offend you. If I do
ever slip up in some way, you ought to tell me off about it and warn me not to do it
again, or shout at me — hit me, even, if you feel like it; I shouldn’t mind. But you
don’t do that. You just ignore me. You leave me utterly at a loss to know what I’m
supposed to have done wrong, so that I’m driven half frantic wondering what I ought
to do to make up for it. If I were to die now, I should die with a grievance, and all the
masses and exorcisms in the world wouldn’t lay my ghost. Only when you explained
what your reason was for ignoring me should I cease from haunting you and be
reborn into another life.’
Dai-yu’s resentment for the gate incident had by now com?pletely evaporated. She
merely said:
‘Oh well, in that case why did you tell your maids not to let me in when I came to
call on you?’
‘I honestly don’t know what you are referring to,’ said Bao-yu in surprise. ‘Strike me
dead if I ever did any such thing!’
‘Hush!’ said Dai-yu. ‘Talking about death at this time of the morning! You should be
more careful what you say. If you did, you did. If you didn’t, you didn’t. There’s no
need for these horrible oaths.’
‘I really and truly didn’t know you had called,’ said Bao-yu. Cousin Bao came and sat
with me a few minutes last night and then went away again. That’s the only call I
know about.’
Dai-yu reflected for a moment or two, then smiled.
‘ Yes, it must have been the maids being lazy. Certainly they can be very
disagreeable at such times.’
‘Yes, I’m sure that’s what it was,’ said Bao-yu. ‘When I get back, I’ll find out who it
was and give her a good talking-to.’
‘I think some of your young ladies could do with a good talking-to,’ said Dai-yu, ‘—
though it’s not really for me to say so. It’s a good job it was only me they were rude
to. If Miss Bao or Miss Cow were to call and they behaved like that to her, that would
be really serious.’
She giggled mischievously. Bao-yu didn’t know whether to laugh with her or grind his
teeth. But just at that moment a maid came up to ask them both to lunch and the
two of them went together out of the Garden and through into the front part of the
mansion, calling in at Lady Wang’s on the way.
‘How did you get on with that medicine of Dr Bao’s,’ Lady Wang asked Dai-yu as
soon as she saw her, ‘— the Court Physician? Do you think you are any better for it?’
‘It didn’t seem to make very much difference,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Grandmother has put
me back on Dr Wang’s prescription.’
‘Cousin Lin has got a naturally weak constitution, Mother,’ said Bao-yu. ‘She takes
cold very easily. These strong decoc?tions are all very well provided she only takes
one or two to dispel the cold. For regular treatment it’s probably best if she sticks to
pills.’
‘The doctor was telling me about some pills for her the other day,’ said Lady Wang,
‘but I just can’t remember the name.’
‘I know the names of most of those pills,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I expect he wanted her to
take Ginseng Tonic Pills.’
‘No, that wasn’t it,’ said Lady Wang.
‘Eight Gem Motherwort Pills?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Zhang’s Dextrals? Zhang’s Sinistrals? If
it wasn’t any of them, it was probably Dr Cui’s Adenophora Kidney Pills.’
‘No,’ said Lady Wang, ‘it was none of those. All I can remember is that there was a
“Vajra” in it.
Bao-yu gave a hoot and clapped his hands:
‘I’ve never heard of “Vajra Pills”. If there are “Vajra Pills”, I suppose there must be
“Buddha Boluses ”!’
The others all laughed. Bao-chai looked at him mockingly. ‘I should think it was
probably “The Deva-king Cardiac Elixir Pills”,’ she said.
‘Yes, yes, that’s it!’ said Lady Wang. ‘Of course! How stupid of me!’
‘No, Mother, not stupid,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s the strain. All those Vajra-kings and
Bodhisattvas have been overworking you!’
‘You’re a naughty boy to make fun of your poor mother,’ said Lady Wang. ‘A good
whipping from your Pa is what you need.’
‘Oh, Father doesn’t whip me for that sort of thing now?adays,’ said Bao-yu.
Now that we know the name of the pills, we must get them to buy some for your
Cousin Lin,’ said Lady Wang.
‘None of those things are any good,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You give me three hundred and
sixty taels of silver and I’ll make up some pills for Cousin Lin that I guarantee will have
her com?pletely cured before she has finished the first boxful.’
‘Stuff!’ said Lady Wang. ‘Whoever heard of a medicine that cost so much?’
‘No, honestly!’ said Bao-yu. ‘This prescription is a very unusual one with very
special ingredients. I can’t remember all of them, but I know they include

the caul of a first-born child;
a ginseng root shaped like a man, with the leaves still on it;
               a turtle-sized polygonum root;
and
     lycoperdon from the stump of a thousand-year-old pine-tree.


— Actually, though, there’s nothing so very special about those ingredients. They’re
all in the standard pharmacopoeia. For “sovereign remedies” they use ingredients
that would really make you jump. I once gave the prescription for one to Cousin Xue.
He was more than a year begging me for it before I would give it to him, and it took
him another two or three years and nearly a thousand taels of silver to get all the
ingredients to?gether. Ask Bao-chai if you don’t believe me, Mother.’
‘I know nothing about it,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I’ve never heard it mentioned. It’s no good
telling Aunt to ask me.’
‘You see! Bao-chai is a good girl. She doesn’t tell lies,’ said Lady Wang.
Bao-yu was standing in the middle of the floor below the kang. He clapped his hands
at this and turned to the others appealingly.
‘But it’s the truth I’m telling you. This is no lie.’
As he turned, he happened to catch sight of Dai-yu, who was sitting behind Bao-chai,
smiling mockingly and stroking her cheek with her finger — which in sign-language
means, ‘You are a great big liar and you ought to be ashamed of yourself.’
But Xi-feng, who happened to be in the inner room super?vising the laying of the
table and had overheard the preceding remarks, now emerged into the outer room
to corroborate:
‘It’s quite true, what Bao says. I don’t think he is making it up,’ she said. ‘Not so
long ago Cousin Xue came to me asking for some pearls, and when I asked him what
he wanted them for, he said, “To make medicine with.” Then he started grumbling
about the trouble he was having in getting the right ingredients and how he had half
a mind not to make this medicine up after all. I said, “What medicine?” and he told
me that it was a prescription that Cousin Bao had given him and reeled off a lot of
ingredients — I can’t remember them now. “Of course,” he said, “I could easily
enough buy a few pearls; only these have to be ones that have been worn. That’s
why I’m asking you for them. If you haven’t got any loose ones, he said, “a few pearls
broken off a bit of jewellery would do. I’d get you something nice to replace it with.”
He was so insistent that in the end I had to break up two of my ornaments for him.
Then he wanted a yard of Imperial red gauze. That was to put over the mortar to
pound the pearls through. He said they had to be ground until they were as fine as
flour.’
‘You see!’ ‘You see!’ Bao-yu kept interjecting throughout this recital.
‘Incidentally, Mother,’ he said, when it was ended, ‘even that was only a substitute.
According to the prescription, the pearls ought really to have come from an ancient
grave. They should really have been pearls taken from jewellery on the corpse of a
long-buried noblewoman. But as one can’t very well go digging up graves and riding
tombs every time one wants to make this medicine, the prescription allows pearls
worn by the living as a second-best.’
‘Blessed name of the Lord!’ said Lady Wang. ‘What a dread?ful idea! Even if you did
get them from a grave, I can’t believe that a medicine made from pearls that had
been come by so wickedly — desecrating people’s bones that had been lying
peacefully in the ground all those hundreds of years — could possibly do you any
good.’
Bao-yu turned to Dai-yu.
‘Did you hear what Feng said?’ he asked her. ‘I hope you’re not going to say that
she was lying.’
Although the remark was addressed to Dai-yu, he winked at Bao-chai as he made it.
Dai-yu clung to Lady Wang.
‘Listen to him, Aunt!’ she wailed. ‘Bao-chai won’t be a party to his lies, but he still
expects me to be.’
‘Bao-yu, you are very unkind to your cousin,’ said Lady Wang.
Bao-yu only laughed.
‘You don’t know the reason, Mother. Bao-chai didn’t know a half of what Cousin
Xue got up to, even when she was living with her mother outside; and now that she’s
moved into the Garden, she knows even less. When she said she didn’t know, she
really didn’t know: she wasn’t giving me the lie. What you don’t realize is that Cousin
Lin was all the time sitting behind her making signs to show that she didn’t believe
me.’
Just then a maid came from Grandmother Jia’s apartment to fetch Bao-yu and Dai-yu
to lunch.
Without saying a word to Bao-yu, Dai-yu got up and, tak?ing the maid’s hand, began
to go. But the maid was reluctant.
‘Let’s wait for Master Bao and we can go together.’
‘He’s not eating lunch today,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Come on, let’s go!’
‘Whether he’s eating lunch or not,’ said the maid, ‘he’d better come with us, so that
he can explain to Her Old Lady?ship about it when she asks.’
‘All right, you wait for him then,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’m going on ahead.’
And off she went.
‘I think I’d rather eat with you today, Mother,’ said Bao-yu.
‘No, no, you can’t,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Today is one of my fast-days: I shall only be
eating vegetables. You go and have a proper meal with your Grandma.’
‘I shall share your vegetables,’ said Bao-yu. Go on, you can go,’ he said, dismissing
the maid; and rushing up to the table, he sat himself down at it in readiness.
‘You others had better get on with your own lunch,’ Lady Wang said to Bao-chai
and the girls. ‘Let him do as he likes.’
‘You really ought to go,’ Bao-chai said to Bao-yu. ‘Whether you have lunch there or
not, you ought to keep Cousin Lin company. She is very upset, you know. Why don’t
you?’
‘Oh, leave her alone!’ said Bao-yu. ‘She’ll be all right presently.’
Soon they had finished eating, and Bao-yu, afraid that Grandmother Jia might be
worrying and at the same time anxious to rejoin Dai-yu, hurriedly demanded tea to
rinse his mouth with. Tan-chun and Xi-chun were much amused.
‘Why are you always in such a hurry, Bao?’ they asked him. ‘Even your eating and
drinking all seems to be done in a rush.’
‘You should let him finish quickly, so that he can get back to his Dai-yu,’ said
Bao-chai blandly. ‘Don’t make him waste time here with us.’
Bao-yu left as soon as he had drunk his tea, and made straight for the west courtyard
where his Grandmother Jia’s apartment was. But as he was passing by the gateway of
Xi?-feng’s courtyard, it happened that Xi-feng herself was stand?ing in her doorway
with one foot on the threshold, grooming her teeth with an ear-cleaner and keeping
a watchful eye on nine or ten pages who were moving potted plants about under her
direction.
‘Ah, just the person I wanted to see!’ she said, as soon as she caught sight of
Bao-yu. ‘Come inside. I want you to write something down for me.’
Bao-yu was obliged to follow her indoors. Xi-feng called for some paper, an inkstone
and a brush, and at once began dictating:
‘ Crimson lining-damask forty lengths, dragonet figured satin forty lengths,
miscellaneous
Imperial gauze one hundred lengths, gold necklets four, —’
‘Here, what is this?’ said Bao-yu. ‘It isn’t an invoice and it isn’t a presentation list.
How am I supposed to write it?’
‘Never you mind about that,’ said Xi-feng. ‘As long as I know what it is, that’s all
that matters. Just put it down any?how.’
Bao-yu wrote down the four items. As soon as he had done so, Xi-feng took up the
paper and folded it away.
‘Now,’ she said, smiling pleasantly, ‘there’s something I want to talk to you about. I
don’t know whether you’ll agree to this or not, but there’s a girl in your room called
“Crimson” whom I’d like to work for me. If I find you someone to re?place her with,
will you let me have her?’
‘There are so many girls in my room,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Please take any you have a fancy
to. You really don’t need to ask me about it.’
‘In that case,’ said Xi-feng, ‘I’ll send for her straight away.’
‘Please do,’ said Bao-yu, and started to go.
‘Hey, come back!’ said Xi-feng. ‘I haven’t finished with you yet.’
‘I’ve got to see Grandma now,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If you’ve got anything else to say, you
can tell me on my way back.’
When he got to Grandmother Jia’s apartment, they had all just finished lunch.
Grandmother Jia asked him if he bad had anything nice to eat with his mother.
‘There wasn’t anything nice,’ he said. ‘But I had an extra bowl of rice.’
Then, after the briefest pause:
‘Where’s Cousin Lin?’
‘In the inner room,’ said Grandmother Jia.
In the inner room a maid stood below the kang blowing on a flat-iron. Up on the kang
two maids were marking some material with a chalked string, while Dai-yu, her head
bent low over her work, was engaged in cutting something from it with her shears.
‘What are you making?’ he asked her. ‘You’ll give yourself a headache, stooping
down like that immediately after your lunch.’
Dai-yu took no notice and went on cutting.
‘That corner looks a bit creased still,’ said one of the maids. ‘it will have to be
ironed again.’
‘Leave it alone!’ said Dai-yu, laying down her shears. ‘It will be all right presently.’
Bao-yu found her reply puzzling.
Bao-chai, Tan-chun and the rest had now arrived in the outer room and were talking
to Grandmother Jia. Presently Bao-chai drifted inside and asked Dai-yu what she was
doing; then, when she saw that she was cutting material, she ex?claimed admiringly.
‘What a lot of things you can do, Dai! Fancy, even dress-making now!’
Dai-yu smiled malignantly.
‘Oh, it’s all lies, really. I just do it to fool people.’
‘I’ve got something to tell you that I think will amuse you, Dai,’ said Bao-chai
pleasantly. ‘When our cousin was holding forth about that medicine just now and I
said I didn’t know about it, I believe actually he was rather wounded.’
‘Oh, leave him alone!’ said Dai-yu. ‘He will be all right presently.’
‘Grandma wants someone to play dominoes with,’ said Bao-yu to Bao-chai. ‘Why
don’t you go and play dominoes?’
‘Oh, is that what I came for?’ said Bao-chai; but she went, notwithstanding.
‘Why don’t you go?’ said Dai-yu. ‘There’s a tiger in this room. You might get eaten.’
She said this still bending over her cutting, which she con?tinued to work away at
without looking up at him.
Finding himself once more ignored, Bao-yu nevertheless attempted to remain jovial.
‘Why don’t you come out for a bit too? You can do this cutting later.’
Dai-yu continued to take no notice.
Failing to get a response from her, he tried the maids:
‘Who told her to do this dress-making?’
‘Whoever told her to do it,’ said Dai-yu, ‘it has nothing whatever to do with Master
Bao.’
Bao-yu was about to retort, but just at that moment someone came in to say that he
was wanted outside, and he was obliged to hurry off.
Dai-yu leaned forward and shouted after him:
‘Holy Name! By the time you get back, I shall be dead.’

*

Outside the gateway to the inner quartets Bao-yu found Tea-leaf waiting.
‘Mr Feng invites you round to his house,’ said Tealeaf.
Bao-yu realized that this must be in connection with the matter Feng Zi-ying had
spoken of on the previous day. He told Tealeaf to send for his going-out clothes, and
went into his outer study to wait for them.
Tealeaf went back to the west inner gate to wait for someone who would carry a
message inside to the maids. Presently an old woman came out:
‘Excuse me, missus,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Master Bao is waiting in the outer study for his
going-out clothes. Could you take a message inside to say that he wants them?’
‘— your mother’s twat!’ said the old woman. ‘Master Bao lives in the Garden now.
All his maids are in the Garden. What do you want to come running round here for?’
Tealeaf laughed at his own mistake.
‘You’re quite right. I’m going cuckoo.’
He ran round to the gate of the Garden. As luck would have it, the boys on that gate
were playing football in the open space below the terraced walk, and when Tealeaf
had explained his errand, one of them ran off inside for him. He returned after a very
long wait, carrying a large bundle, which he handed to Tealeaf, and which Tealeaf
carried back to the outer study.
While he was changing, Bao-yu asked for his horse to be saddled, and presently set
off, taking only Tealeaf, Ploughboy, Two-times and Oldie as his attendants. When they
reached Feng Zi-ying’s gate, someone ran in to announce his arrival, and Feng Zi-ying
came out in person to greet him and led him inside to meet the company.
This comprised Xue Pan, who had evidently been waiting there for some time, a
number of boy singers, a female imper?sonator called Jiang Yu-han and a girl called
Nuageuse from the Budding Grove, a high-class establishment specializing in female
entertainers. When everyone had been introduced, tea was served.
‘Now come on!’ said Bao-yu, as he picked up the proffered cup of tea. ‘What about
this “lucky accident” you mentioned yesterday? I’ve been waiting anxiously to hear
about it ever since I saw you. That’s why I came so promptly when I got your
invitation.’
Feng Zi-ying laughed.
‘You and your cousin are such simple souls — I find it rahver touchin’! Afraid it was
pure invention, what I said yesterday. I said it to make you come, because I fought
that if I asked you outright to come and drink wiv me, you’d make excuses. Anyway, it
worked.’
The company joined in his merriment.
Wine was now brought in and everyone sat down in the places assigned to them.
Feng Zi-ying first got one of the singing-boys to pour for them; then he called on
Nuageuse to drink with each of the guests in turn.
Xue Pan, by the time he had three little cupfuls of wine inside him, was already
beginning to be obstreperous. He seized Nuageuse by the hand and drew her
towards him:
‘If you’d sing me a nice new song - one of your specials, I’d drink a whole jarful for
you. How about it, eh?’
Nuageuse had to oblige him by taking up her lute and sing?ing the following song for
him to her own accompaniment:

              Two lovely boys
              Are both in love with me
And I can’t get either from my mind.
Both are so beautiful
So wonderful
So marvellous
To give up either one would be unkind.
Last night I promised I would go
To meet one of them in the garden where the roses grow;
The other came to see what he could find.
And now that we three are all
Here in this tribunal,
    There are no words that come into my mind.


‘There you are!’ she said. ‘Now drink your jarful!’
‘That one’s not worth a jarful,’ said Xue Pan. ‘Sing us a better one.’
‘Now just a minute,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Just guzzling like this will make us drunk in no
time without giving us any real enjoyment. I’ve got a good new drinking-game for
you. Let me first drink the M.C.’s starting-cup, and I’ll tell you the rules. After that,
anyone who doesn’t toe the line will be made to drink ten Sconce-cups straight off as
a forfeit, give up his seat at the party, and spend the rest of the time pouring out
drinks for the rest of us.’
Feng Zi-ying and Jiang Yu-han agreed enthusiastically, and Bao-yu picked up one of
the extra large cups that had now been provided and drained its contents at a single
draught.
‘Now,’ he said. ‘We’re going to take four words — let’s say “upset”, “glum”, “blest”
and “content”. You have to begin by saying “The girl is —”, and then you say one of
the four words. That’s your first line. The next line has to rhyme with the first line and
it has to give the reason why the girl is whatever it says — “upset or glum” or “blest”
or content. When you’ve done all four, you’re entitled to drink the wine in front of
you. Only, before drinking it, you’ve first got to sing some new popular song; and
after you’ve drunk it, you’ve got to choose some animal or vegetable object from the
things in front of us and recite a line from a well-known poem, or an old couplet, or a
quotation from the classics—’
Before he could finish, Xue Pan was on his feet, protesting vigorously:
‘You can count me out of this. I’m taking no part in this. This is just to make a fool of
me, isn’t it?’
Nuageuse, too, stood up and attempted to push him back into his seat:
‘What are you so afraid of, a practiced drinker like you? You can’t be any worse at
this sort of thing than I am, and I’m going to have a go when my turn comes. If you
do it all right, you’ve got nothing to worry about, and even if you can’t, you’ll only be
made to drink a few cups of wine; whereas if you refuse to follow the rules at the
very outset, you’ll have to drink ten sconces straight off in a row and then be thrown
out of the party and made to pour drinks for the rest of us.’
‘Bravo!’ cried the others, clapping; and Xue Pan, seeing them united against him,
subsided.
Bao-yu now began his own turn:

    ‘The girl’s upset:
              The years pass by, but no one’s claimed her yet.
The girl looks glum:
              Her true-love’s gone to follow ambition’s drum.
    The girl feels blest:
          The mirror shows her looks are at their best.
    The girl’s content:
          Long summer days in pleasant pastimes spent.’

The others all applauded, except Xue Pan, who shook his head disapprovingly:
‘No good, no good!’ he said. ‘Pay the forfeit.’
‘Why, what’s wrong with it?’ they asked him.
‘I couldn’t understand a word of it.’
Nuageuse gave him a pinch:
‘Keep quiet and try to think what you’re going to say,’ she advised him; ‘otherwise
you’ll have nothing ready when your own turn comes and you’ll have to pay the
forfeit yourself.’
Thereupon she picked up her lute and accompanied Bao-yu as he sang the following
song:


‘Still weeping tears of blood about our separation:
Little red love-beans of my desolation.
Still blooming flowers I see outside my window growing.
Still awake in the dark I hear the wind a-blowing.
Still oh still I can’t forget those old hopes and fears.
Still can’t swallow food and drink, ’cos I’m choked with tears.
Mirror, mirror on the wall, tell me it’s not true:
Do I look so thin and pale, do I look so blue?
Mirror, mirror, this long night bow shall I get through?
Oh—oh—oh!
Blue as the mist upon the distant mountains,
Blue as the water in the ever-flowing fountains.’

General applause — except from Xue Pan, who objected that there was ‘no rhythm’.
Bao-yu now drank his well-earned cup — the ‘pass cup’ as they call it — and, picking
up a slice of pear from the table, concluded his turn with the following quotation:


‘Rain whips the pear-tree, shut fast the door.’
Now it was Feng Zi-ying’s turn:
‘The girl’s upset:
Her husband’s ill and she’s in debt.
The girl looks glum:
The gale has turned her room into a slum.
The girl feels blest:
She’s got twin babies at the breast.
The girl’s content:
Waiting a certain pleasurable event.’
Next, holding up his cupful of wine in readiness to drink, he sang this song:
‘You’re so exciting,
And so inviting;
You’re my Mary Contrary;
You’re a crazy, mad thing.
You’re my goddess, but oh I you’re deaf to my praying:
Why won’t you listen to what I am saying?
If you don’t believe me, make a small investigation:
You will soon find out the true depth of my admiration.’

Then he drained his bumper and, picking up a piece of chicken from one of the dishes,
ended the performance, prior to popping it into his mouth, with a line from Wen
Ting-yun:


‘From moonlit cot the cry of chanticleer.’
Next it was the turn of Nuageuse:
‘The girl’s upset:’
she began,
‘Not knowing how the future’s to be met—’

Xue Pan laughed noisily.
‘That’s all right, my darling, don’t you worry! Your Uncle Xue will take care of you.’
‘Shush!’ said the others. ‘Don’t confuse her.’
She continued:


‘The girl looks glum:
Nothing but blows and hard words from her Mum— ’


‘I saw that Mum of yours the other day,’ said Xue Pan, ‘and I particularly told her
that she wasn’t to beat you.’
‘Another word from you,’ said the others, ‘and you’ll be made to drink ten cups as a
punishment.’
Xue Pan gave his own face a slap.
‘Sorry! I forgot. Won’t do it again.’

‘The girl feels blest:’
said Nuageuse,
‘Her young man’s rich and beautifully dressed.
The girl’s content:
She’s been performing in a big event.’

Next Nuageuse sang her song:


‘A flower began to open in the month of May.
Along came a honey-bee to sport and play.
He pushed and he squeezed to get inside,
But he couldn’t get in however hard he tried.
       So on the flower’s lip he just hung around,
A-playing the see-saw up and down.
Oh my honey-sweet,
Oh my sweets of sin,
If I don’t open up,
How will you get in?’

After drinking her ‘pass cup’; she picked up a peach:


‘So bonny blooms the peach-tree-o?’

It was now Xue Pan’s turn.
‘Ah yes, now, let’s see! I have to say something now, don’t I?’
‘The girl’s upset—’
But nothing followed.
‘All night, what’s she upset about then?’ said Feng Zi-ying with a laugh. ‘Buck up!’
Xue Pan appeared to be engaged in a species of mental effort so frightful that his
eyes seemed about to pop out of his head. After glaring fixedly for an unconscionable
time, he said:
‘The girl’s upset—’
He coughed a couple of times. Then at last it came:


‘The girl’s upset:
She’s married to a marmoset.’

The others greeted this with a roar of laughter.
‘What are you laughing at?’ said Xue Pan. ‘That’s perfectly reasonable, isn’t it? If a
girl was expecting a proper husband and he turned out to be one of them, she’d have
cause to be upset, wouldn’t she?’
His audience were by now doubled up.
‘That’s perfectly true,’ they conceded. ‘Very good. Now what about the next bit?’
Xue Pan glared a while very concentratedly, then:


‘The girl looks glum—’

But after that was silence.
‘Come on!’ said the others. ‘Why was she glum?’

‘His dad’s a baboon with a big red bum.’

‘Ho! Ho! Ho! Pay the forfeit,’ they cried. ‘The first one was bad enough. We really
can’t let this one go.’
The more officious of them even began filling the sconce-cups for him. But Bao-yu
allowed the line.
‘As long as it rhymes,’ he said, ‘we’ll let it pass.’
‘There you are! ‘ said Xue Pan. ‘The M.C. says it’s all right. What are the rest of you
making such a fuss about?’
At this the others desisted.
‘The next two are even harder,’ said Nuageuse. ‘Shall I do them for you, dear?’
‘Piss off!’ said Xue Pan. ‘D’you think I haven’t got any good lines of my own? Listen
to this:

The girl feels blest:
In bridal bower she takes her rest.’

The others stared at him in amazement:
‘I say, old chap, that’s a bit poetical for you, isn’t it?’ Xue Pan continued
unconcernedly:


‘The girls content:
She’s got a big prick up her vent.’

The others looked away with expressions of disgust.
‘Oh dear, oh dear! Hurry up and get on with the song, then.’

‘One little gnat went hum hum hum,’

Xue Pan began tunelessly. The others looked at him open-mouthed:
‘What sort of song is that?’
Xue Pan droned on, ignoring the question:


‘Two little flies went bum bum bum,
Three little —’

Stop!’ shouted the others.
‘Sod you lot!’ said Xue Pan. ‘This is the very latest new hit. It’s called the Hum-bum
Song. If you can’t be bothered to listen to it, you’ll have to let me off the other thing.
I’ll agree not to sing the rest of the song on that condition.’
‘Yes, yes, we’ll let you off,’ they said. ‘Just don’t interfere with the rest of us, that’s
all we ask.’
This meant that it was now Jiang Yu-han’s turn to perform. This is what he said:
‘The girl’s upset:
Her man’s away, she fears he will forget.
The girl looks glum:
So short of cash she can’t afford a crumb.
The girl feels blest:
Her lampwick’s got a lucky crest.
The girl’s content:
She’s married to a perfect gent.’

Then he sang this song:


‘A mischievous bundle of charm and love,
Or an angel come down from the skies above?
Sweet sixteen
And so very green,
Yet eager to see all there is to be seen.
Aie aie aie
The galaxy’s high
In the roof of the sky,
And the drum from the tower
Sounds the midnight hour,
So trim the lamp, love, and come with me
Inside the bed-curtains, and you shall see!’

He raised the pass cup to his lips, but before drinking it, smiled round at his auditors
and made this little speech:
‘I’m afraid my knowledge of poetry is strictly limited. However, I happened to see a
couplet on someone’s wall yesterday which has stuck in my mind; and as one line in it
is about something I can see here, I shall use it to finish my turn with.’
So saying, he drained the cup and then, picking up a spray of cassia, recited the
following line:


‘The flowers’ aroma breathes of hotter days.’

The others all accepted this as a satisfactory conclusion of the performance. Not so
Xue Pan, however, who leaped to his feet and began protesting noisily:
‘Terrible! Pay the forfeit. Where’s the little doll? I can’t see any doll on the table.’
‘I didn’t say anything about a doll,’ said Jiang Yu-han.
    ‘What are you talking about?’
‘Come on, don’t try to wriggle out of it!’ said Xue Pan. ‘Say what you said just now
again.’


‘The flowers’ aroma breathes of hotter days.’

‘There you are!’ said Xue Pan.’ “Aroma”. That’s the name of a little doll. Ask him if
you don’t believe me.’ He pointed to Bao-yu.
Bao-yu looked embarrassed.
‘Cousin Xue, this time I think you do have to pay the forfeit.’
‘All right, all right!’ said Xue Pan. ‘I’ll drink.’
And he picked up the wine in front of him and drained it at a gulp.
Feng Zi-ying and Jiang Yu-han were still puzzled and asked him what this was all
about. But it was Nuageuse who explained. Immediately Jiang Yu-han was on his feet
apologiz?ing. The others reassured him.
‘It’s not your fault. “Ignorance excuses all”,’ they said.
Shortly after this Bao-yu had to take temporary leave of the company to ease his
bladder and Jiang Yu-han followed him outside. As the two of them stood side by
side under the eaves, Jiang Yu-han once more offered Bao-yu his apologies. Much
taken with the actor’s winsome looks and gentleness of man?ner, Bao-yu impulsively
took his hand and gave it a squeeze.
‘Do come round to our place some time when you are free,’ he said. ‘There’s
something I want to ask you about. You have an actor in your company called “Bijou”
whom everyone is talking about lately. I should so much like to meet him, but so far I
haven’t had an opportunity.’
‘That’s me!’ said Jiang Yu-han. “Bijou” is my stage name.’
Bao-yu stamped with delight.
‘But this is wonderful! I must say, you fully deserve your reputation. Oh dear! What
am I going to do about a First Meeting present?’
He thought for a bit, then took a fan from his sleeve and broke off its jade pendant.
‘Here you are,’ he said, handing it to Bijou. ‘It’s not much of a present, I’m afraid,
but it will do to remind you of our meeting.’
Bijou smiled and accepted it ceremoniously:
‘I have done nothing to deserve this favour. It is too great an honour. Well, thank
you. There’s rather an unusual thing I’m wearing I put it on today for the first time, so
it’s still fairly new: I wonder if you will allow me to give it to you as a token of my
warm feelings towards you?’
He opened up his gown, undid the crimson cummerbund with which his trousers
were fastened, and handed it to Bao?-yu.
‘It comes from the tribute sent by the Queen of the Madder Islands. It’s for wearing
in summer. It makes you smell nice and it doesn’t show perspiration stains. I was
given it yester?day by the Prince of Beijing, and today is the first time it s ever been
worn. I wouldn’t give a thing like this to anyone else, but I’d like you to have it. Will
you take your own sash off, please, so that I can put it on instead?’
Bao-yu received the crimson cummerbund with delight and quickly took off his own
viridian-coloured sash to give to Bijou in exchange. They had just finished fastening
the sashes on again when Xue Pan jumped out from behind and seized hold of them
both.
‘What are you two up to, leaving the party and sneaking off like this?’ he said.
‘Come on, take ‘em out again and let’s have a look!’
It was useless for them to protest that the situation was not what he imagined. Xue
Pan continued to force his unwelcome attentions upon them until Feng Zi-ying came
out and rescued them. After that they returned to the party and continued drinking
until the evening.
Back in his own apartment in the Garden, Bao-yu took off his outer clothes and
relaxed with a cup of tea. While he did so, Aroma noticed that the pendant of his fan
was missing and asked him what had become of it. Bao-yu told her that it had come
off while he was riding, and she gave the matter no more thought. But later, when he
was going to bed, she saw the magnificent blood-red sash round his waist and began
to put two and two together.
‘Since you’ve got a better sash now,’ she said, ‘do you think I could have mine back,
please?’
Bao-yu remembered, too late, that the viridian sash had been Aroma’s and that he
ought never to have given it away. He now very much regretted having done so, but
instead of apologizing, attempted to pass it off with a laugh.
‘I’ll get you another,’ he told her lightly.
Aroma shook her head and sighed.
‘I knew you still got up to these tricks,’ she said, ‘but at least you might refrain from
giving my things to those disgusting creatures. I’m surprised you haven’t got more
sense.’
She was going to say more, but checked herself for fear of provoking an explosion
while he was in his cups. And since there was nothing else she could do, she went to
bed.
She awoke at first daylight next morning to find Bao-yu smiling down at her:
‘We might have been burgled last night for all you’d have known about it — Look at
your trousers!’
Looking down, Aroma saw the sash that Bao-yu had been wearing yesterday tied
round her own waist, and knew that he must have exchanged it for hers during the
night. She tore it off impatiently.
‘I don’t want the horrible thing. The sooner you take it away the better.’
Bao-yu was anxious that she should keep it, and after a great deal of coaxing she
consented, very reluctantly, to tie it on again. But she took it off once and for all as
soon as he was out of the room and threw it into an empty chest, having first found
another one of her own to put on in its place.
Bao-yu made no comment on the change when they were together again. He merely
inquired whether anything had happened the day before, while he was out.
‘Mrs Lian sent someone round to fetch Crimson,’ said Aroma. ‘She wanted to wait
for you; but it seemed to me that it wasn’t all that important, so I took it on myself to
send her off straight away.’
‘Quite right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I already knew about it. There was no need to wait till I
got back.’
Aroma continued:
‘Her Grace sent that Mr Xia of the Imperial Bedchamber yesterday with a hundred
and twenty taels of silver to pay for a three-day Pro Viventibus by the Taoists of the
Lunar Queen temple starting on the first of next month. There are to be plays
performed as part of the Offering; and Mr Zhen and all the other gentlemen are to go
there to burn incense. Oh, and Her Grace’s presents for the Double Fifth have
arrived.’
She ordered a little maid to get out Bao-yu’s share of the things sent. There were two
Palace fans of exquisite workmanship, two strings of red musk-scented
medicine-beads, two lengths of maidenhair chiffon and a grass-woven ‘lotus’ mat to
lie on in the hot weather.
‘Did the others all get the same?’ he asked.
‘Her Old Ladyship’s presents were the same as yours with the addition of a
perfume-sceptre and an agate head-rest, and Sir Zheng’s, Lady Wang’s and Mrs Xue’s
were the same as Her Old Ladyship’s but without the head-rest; Miss Bao’s were
exactly the same as yours; Miss Lin, Miss Ying-chun, Miss Tan-chun and Miss Xi-chun
got only the fans and the beads; and Mrs Zhu and Mrs Lian both got two lengths of
gauze, two lengths of chiffon, two perfume sachets and two moulded
medicine-cakes.’
‘Funny!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I wonder why Miss Lin didn’t get the same as me and why
only Miss Bao’s and mine were the same. There must have been some mistake,
surely?’
‘When they unpacked them yesterday, the separate lots were all labelled,’ said
Aroma. ‘I don’t see how there could have been any mistake. Your share was in Her
Old Ladyship’s room and I went round there to get it for you. Her Old Lady?ship says
she wants you to go to Court at four o’clock tomor?row morning to give thanks.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Bao-yu inattentively, and gave Ripple instructions to take his
presents round to Dai-yu:
‘Tell Miss Lin that I got these things yesterday and that if there’s anything there she
fancies, I should like her to keep it.’
Ripple went off with the presents. She was back in a very short time, however.
‘Miss Lin says she got some yesterday too, and will you please keep these for
yourself.’
Bao-yu told her to put them away. As soon as he had washed, he left to pay his
morning call on Grandmother Jia; but just as he was going out he saw Dai-yu coming
towards him and hurried forward to meet her.
‘Why didn’t you choose anything from the things I sent you?’
Yesterday’s resentments were now quite forgotten; today Dai-yu had fresh matter to
occupy her mind.
‘I’m not equal to the honour,’ she said. ‘You forget, I’m not in the gold and jade
class like you and your Cousin Bao. I’m only a common little wall-flower!’
The reference to gold and jade immediately aroused Bao?-yu’s suspicions.
‘I don’t know what anyone else may have been saying on the subject,’ he said, ‘but
if any such thought ever so much as crossed my mind, may Heaven strike me dead,
and may I never be reborn as a human being!’
Seeing him genuinely bewildered, Dai-yu smiled in what was meant to be a
reassuring manner.
‘I wish you wouldn’t make these horrible oaths. It’s so dis?agreeable. Who cares
about your silly old “gold and jade”, anyway?’
‘It’s hard to make you see what is in my heart,’ said Bao-yu. ‘One day perhaps you
will know. But I can tell you this. My heart has room for four people only. Grannie
and my parents are three of them and Cousin Dai is the fourth. I swear to you there
isn’t a fifth.’
‘There’s no need for you to swear,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I know very well that Cousin Dai has
a place in your heart. The trouble is that as soon as Cousin Chai comes along, Cousin
Dai gets forgotten.’
‘You imagine these things,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It really isn’t as you say.’
‘Yesterday when Little Miss Bao wouldn’t tell lies for you, why did you turn to me
and expect me to? How would you like it if I did that sort of thing to you?’
Bao-chai happened to come along while they were still talk?ing and the two of them
moved aside to avoid her. Bao-chai saw this clearly, but pretended not to notice and
hurried by with lowered eyes. She went and sat with Lady Wang for a while and from
there went on to Grandmother Jia’s. Bao-yu was already at his grandmother’s when
she got there.
Bao-chai had on more than one occasion heard her mother telling Lady Wang and
other people that the golden locket she wore had been given her by a monk, who
had insisted that when she grew up the person she married must be someone who
had ‘a jade to match the gold’. This was one of the reasons why she tended to keep
aloof from Bao-yu. The slight embarrassment she always felt as a result of her
mother’s chat?ter had yesterday been greatly intensified when Yuan-chun singled her
out as the only girl to receive the same selection of presents as Bao-yu. She was
relieved to think that Bao-yu, so wrapped up in Dai-yu that his thoughts were only of
her, was unaware of her embarrassment.
But now here was Bao-yu smiling at her with sudden interest.
‘Cousin Bao, may I have a look at your medicine-beads?’
She happened to be wearing one of the little chaplets on her left wrist and began to
pull it off now in obedience to his re?quest. But Bao-chai was inclined to plumpness
and perspired easily, and for a moment or two it would not come off. While she was
struggling with it, Bao-yu had ample opportunity to observe her snow-white arm,
and a feeling rather warmer than admiration was kindled inside him.
‘If that arm were growing on Cousin Lin’s body,’ he specu?lated, ‘I might hope one
day to touch it. What a pity it’s hers! Now I shall never have that good fortune.’
Suddenly he thought of the curious coincidence of the gold and jade talismans and
their matching inscriptions, which Dai-yu’s remark had reminded him of. He looked
again at Bao-chai—
that face like the full moon’s argent bowl;
those eyes like sloes;
those lips whose carmine hue no Art contrived;
and brows by none but Nature’s pencil lined.

This was beauty of quite a different order from Dai-yu’s. Fas?cinated by it, he
continued to stare at her with a somewhat dazed expression, so that when she
handed him the chaplet, which she had now succeeded in getting off her wrist, he
failed to take it from her.
Seeing that he had gone off into one of his trances, Bao-chai threw down the chaplet
in embarrassment and turned to go. But Dai-yu was standing on the threshold, biting
a corner of her handkerchief, convulsed with silent laughter.
‘I thought you were so delicate,’ said Bao-chai. ‘What are you standing there in the
draught for?’
‘I’ve been in the room all the time,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I just this moment went to have a
look outside because I heard the sound of something in the sky. It was a gawping
goose.’
‘Where?’ said Bao-chai. ‘Let me have a look.’
‘Oh,’ said Dai-yu, ‘as soon as I went outside he flew away with a whir-r-r-’
She flicked her long handkerchief as she said this in the direction of Bao-yu’s face.
‘Ow!’ he exclaimed — She had flicked him in the eye.
The extent of the damage will be examined in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 29

In which the greatly blessed pray for yet greater blessings
And the highly strung rise to new heights of passion

WE told in the last chapter how, as Bao-yu was standing lost in one of his trances,
Dai-yu flicked her handkerchief at him and made him jump by inadvertently catching
him in the eye with it.
     ‘Who did that?’ he asked.
Dai-yu laughingly shook her head.
‘I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to. Bao-chai wanted to look at a gawping goose, and I
accidentally flicked you while I was showing her how it went.’
Bao-yu rubbed his eye. He appeared to be about to say something, but then thought
better of it.
And so the matter passed.

*

Shortly after this incident Xi-feng arrived and began talking about the arrangements
that had been made for the purification ceremonies, due to begin on the first of next
month at the Taoist temple of the Lunar Goddess. She invited Bao-?chai, Bao-yu and
Dai-yu to go with her there to watch the plays.
‘Oh no!’ said Bao-chai. ‘It’s too hot. Even if they were to do something we haven’t
seen before — which isn’t likely — I think I should still not want to go.’
     ‘But it’s cool there,’ said Xi-feng. ‘There are upstairs gal?leries on all three sides
that you can watch from in the shade. And if we go, I shall send someone a day or
two in advance to turn the Taoists out of that part of the temple and make it nice and
clean for us and get them to put up blinds. And I’ll ask them not to let any other
visitors in on that day. I’ve already told Lady Wang I’m going, so if you others won’t
come with me, I shall go by myself. I’m so bored lately. And it’s such a business when
we put on our own plays at home, that I can never enjoy them properly.’
‘All right then, I’ll come,’ said Grandmother Jia, who had been listening.
‘You’ll come, Grannie? Well that’s splendid, isn’t it! That means it will be just as bad
for me as it would be if I were watching here at home.’
‘Now look here,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘I shan’t want you to stand and wait on me.
Let me take the gallery facing the stage and you can have one of the side galleries all
to yourself; then you can sit down and enjoy yourself in comfort.’
Xi-feng was touched.
‘Do come!’ Grandmother Jia said to Bao-chai. ‘I’ll see that your mother comes too.
The days are so long now, and there’s nothing to do at home except go to sleep.’
Bao-chai had to promise that she would go.
Grandmother Jia now sent someone to invite Aunt Xue. The messenger was to call in
on the way at Lady Wang’s and ask her if the girls might go as well.
Lady Wang had already made it clear that she would not be going herself, partly
because she was not feeling very well, and partly because she wanted to be at home
in case any further messages arrived from Yuan-chun; but when she learned of
Grandmother Jia’s enthusiasm, she had word carried into the Garden that not just
the girls but anyone else who wanted to might go along with Grandmother Jia’s party
on the first.
When this exciting news had been transmitted throughout the Garden, the maids
some of whom hardly set foot outside their own courtyards from one year’s end to
the next were all dying to go, and those whose mistresses showed a lethargic
disinclination to accept employed a hundred different wiles to make sure that they
did so. The result was that in the end all the Garden’s inhabitants said that they
would be going. Grandmother Jia was quite elated and at once issued orders for the
cleaning and preparation of the temple theatre.
But these are details with which we need not concern our?selves.
On the morning of the first sedans, carriages, horses and people filled all the roadway
outside Rong-guo House. The stewards in charge knew that the occasion of this
outing was a Pro Viventibus ordered by Her Grace the Imperial Concubine and that
Her Old Ladyship was going in person to burn incense — quite apart from the fact
that this was the first day of the month and the first day of the Summer Festival;
con?sequently the turnout was as splendid as they could make it and far exceeded
anything that had been seen on previous occasions.
Presently Grandmother Jia appeared, seated, in solitary splendour, in a large
palanquin carried by eight bearers. Li Wan, Xi-feng and Aunt Xue followed, each in a
palanquin with four bearers. After them came Bao-chai and Dai-yu sharing a carriage
with a splendid turquoise-coloured canopy trimmed with pearls. The carriage after
them, in which Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun sat, had vermilion-painted wheels
and was shaded with a large embroidered umbrella. After them rode Grandmother
Jia’s maids, Faithful, Parrot, Amber and Pearl; after them Lin Dai-yu’s maids,
Nightingale, Snowgoose and Delicate; then Bao-chai’s maids, Oriole and Apricot; then
Ying-chun’s maids, Chess and Tangerine; then Tan-chun’s maids, Scribe and Ebony;
then Xi-chun’s maids, Picture and Landscape; then Aunt Xue’s maids, Providence and
Prosper, sharing a carriage with Caltrop and Caltrop’s own maid, Advent; then Li
Wan’s maids, Candida and Casta; then Xi-feng’s own maids, Patience, Felicity and
Crimson, with two of Lady Wang’s maids, Golden and Suncloud, whom Xi-feng had
agreed to take with her, in the carriage behind. In the carriage after them sat another
couple of maids and a nurse holding Xi-feng’s little girl. Yet more carriages followed
carrying the nannies and old women from the various apart?ments and the women
whose duty it was to act as duennas when the ladies of the household went out of
doors. The street was packed with carriages as far as the eye could see in either
direction, and Grandmother Jia’s palanquin was well on the way to the temple before
the last passengers in the rear had finished taking their places. A confused hubbub of
laughter and chatter rose from the line of carriages while they were doing so,
punctuated by an occasional louder and more dis?tinctly audible protest, such as:
‘I’m not sitting next to you!’
or,
‘You’re squashing the Mistress’s bundle!’
or,
‘Look, you’ve trodden on my spray!’
or,
‘You’ve ruined my fan, clumsy!’
Zhou Rui’s wife walked up and down calling for some order:
‘Girls! Girls! You’re out in the street now, where people can see you. A little
behaviour, please!’
She had to do this several times before the clamour sub?sided somewhat.
The footmen and insignia-bearers at the front of the proces?sion had now reached
the temple, and as the files of their column opened out to range themselves on
either side of the gateway, the onlookers lining the sides of the street were able to
see Bao-yu on a splendidly caparisoned white horse riding at the head of the
procession immediately in front of his grandmother’s great palanquin with its eight
bearers. As Grandmother Jia and her party approached the temple, there was a crash
of drums and cymbals from the roadside. It was the Taoists of the temple come out
to welcome them, with old Abbot Zhang at their head, resplendent in cope and
vestments and with a burning joss-stick in his hand.
The palanquin passed through the gateway and into the first courtyard. From her
seat inside it Grandmother Jia could see the terrifying painted images of the temple
guardians, one on each side of the inner gate, flanked by that equally ferocious pair,
Thousand League Eye with his blue face and Favourable Wind Ear with his green one,
and farther on, the benigner forms of the City God and the little Local Gods. She
ordered the bearers to halt, and Cousin Zhen at the head of the younger male
members of the clan came forward from the inner court?yard to meet her.
Xi-feng, whose palanquin was nearest to Grandmother Jia’s, realized that Faithful and
the other maids were too far back in the procession to be able to reach the old lady
in time to help her out, and hurried forward to perform this service herself.
Unfortunately a little eleven- or twelve-year-old acolyte, who had been going round
with a pair of snuffers trimming the wicks of the numerous candles that were burning
everywhere and whom the arrival of the procession had caught unawares, chose this
very moment to attempt a getaway and ran head-on into her. Out flew Xi-feng’s hand
and dealt him a resounding smack on the face that sent him flying.
‘Clumsy brat!’ she shouted. ‘Look where you’re going!’
The little acolyte picked himself up and, leaving his snuffers where they had fallen,
darted off in the direction of the gate. But by now Bao-chai and the other young
ladies were getting down from their carriages and a phalanx of women-servants
clustered all round them, making egress impossible. Seeing a little Taoist running
towards them, the women began to scream and shout:
‘Catch him! Catch him! Hit him! Hit him!’
‘What is it?’ asked Grandmother Jia in alarm, hearing this hubbub behind her, and
Cousin Zhen went forward to inves?tigate.
‘It’s one of the young acolytes,’ said Xi-feng as she helped the old lady from her
conveyance. ‘He was snuffing the candles and didn’t get away in time and now he’s
rushing around trying to find a way out.’
‘Bring him to me, poor little thing!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘And don’t frighten him.
These children from poorer families have generally been rather spoiled. You can’t
expect them to stand up to great occasions like this. It would be a shame to frighten
the poor little thing out of his wits. Think how upset his mother and father would be.
Go on!’ she said to Cousin Zhen. ‘Go and fetch him yourself.’
Cousin Zhen was obliged to retrieve the little Taoist in per?son and led him by the
hand to Grandmother Jia. The boy knelt down in front of her, the snuffers — now
restored to him – clutched in one hand, trembling like a leaf. Grandmother Jia asked
Cousin Zhen to raise him to his feet.
‘Don’t be afraid,’ she told the boy. ‘How old are you?’
But the little boy’s mouth was hurting him too badly to speak.
‘Poor little thing!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You’d better take him away, Zhen. Give
him some money to buy sweeties with and tell the others that they are not to
grumble at him.’
Cousin Zhen had to promise, and led the boy away, while the old lady led her party
inside to begin a systematic tour of the shrines.
The pages in the outer courtyard, who had a moment before witnessed Grandmother
Jia and her train trooping through the gateway that led into the inner courtyard,
were surprised to see Cousin Zhen now emerging from it again with a little Taoist in
tow. They heard him say that the boy was to be taken out and given a few hundred
cash and that he was to be treated kindly. A few of them came forward and led the
child away in obedience to his instructions.
Still standing at the top of the steps to the inner gate, Cousin Zhen inquired what had
become of the stewards.
‘Steward! Steward!’ shouted the pages in unison, and al?most immediately Lin
Zhi-xiao came running out from heaven knows where, adjusting his hat with one
hand as he ran.
‘This is a big place,’ said Cousin Zhen when Lin Zhi-xiao was standing in front of him,
‘and we weren’t expecting so many here today. I want you to take all the people you
need and stay here in this courtyard with them. Those you don’t need here can wait
in the second courtyard. And pick some reliable boys to go on this gate and the two
posterns to pass word through to those outside if those inside need anything. Do you
understand? All the ladies are here today and I don’t want any outsiders to get in. Is
that understood?’
‘Yes sir!’ said Lin Zhi-xiao. ‘Sir!’
‘Well get on with it!’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘Where’s Rong got to?’
The words were scarcely out of his mouth when Jia Rong came bounding out of the
bell-tower, buttoning his jacket as he ran.
‘Look at him!’ said Cousin Zhen irately. ‘Enjoying him-self in the cool while I am
roasting down here! Spit at him, someone.’
Long familiarity with Cousin Zhen’s temper had taught the boys that he would brook
no opposition when roused. One of them obediently stepped forward and spat in Jia
Rong’s face; then, as Cousin. Zhen continued to glare at him, he rebuked Jia Rong for
presuming to be cool while his father was still sweating outside in the sun. Jia Rong
was obliged to stand with his arms hanging submissively at his sides through?out this
public humiliation, not daring to utter a word.
The other members of Jia Rong’s generation who were present — Jia Yun, Jia Ping, Jia
Qin and the rest — were greatly alarmed by this outburst; indeed, even the clansmen
of Cousin Zhen’s own generation — the Jia Bins and Jia Huangs and Jia Qiongs —
were to be seen putting their hats on and slinking out, one by one, from the shadow
of the walls.
‘What are you standing here for?’ said Cousin Zhen to Jia Rong. ‘Why don’t you get
on your horse and go back home and tell your mother and that new wife of yours
that Her Old Ladyship is here with all the Rong-guo girls. Tell them they must come
here at once to wait on her.’
Jia Rong ran outside and began bawling impatiently for his horse. ‘What on earth can
have got into him that he should suddenly have picked on me like that?’ he muttered
to him?self resentfully; then, as his horse had still not arrived, he shouted angrily at
the grooms:
‘Come on, bring that horse, damn you! Are your hands tied or something?’
He would have liked to send a boy in his place, but was afraid that if he did, his father
would find out when he went back later to report; and so, when the horse arrived, he
mounted and rode off home.
Cousin Zhen was about to turn and go in again when he discovered old Abbot Zhang
at his elbow, smiling somewhat unnaturally.
‘Perhaps I don’t come in quite the same category as the others,’ said the old Taoist.
‘Perhaps I should be allowed in?side to wait on Her Old Ladyship. However. In this
inclement heat, and with so many young ladies about, I shouldn’t like to presume. I
will do whatever you say. I did just wonder whether Her Old Ladyship might ask for
me, or whether she might require a guide to take her round the shrines…How?ever.
Perhaps it would be best if I waited here.’
Cousin Zhen was aware that, though Abbot Zhang had started life a poor boy and
entered the Taoist church as ‘proxy novice of Grandmother Jia’s late husband, a
former Emperor had with his own Imperial lips conferred on him the title ‘Doctor
Mysticus’, and he now held the seals of the Board of Commissioners of the Taoist
Church, had been awarded the title ‘Doctor Serenissimus’ by the reigning sovereign,
and was addressed as ‘Holiness’ by princes, dukes and governors of provinces. He
was therefore not a man to be trifled with. Moreover he was constantly in and out of
the two mansions and on familiar terms with most of the Jia ladies. Cousin Zhen at
once became affable.
‘Oh, you’re one of the family, Papa Zhang, so let’s have no more of that kind of talk,
or I’ll take you by that old beard of yours and give it a good pull. Come on, follow
me!’
Abbot Zhang followed him inside, laughing delightedly.
Having found Grandmother Jia, Cousin Zhen ducked and smiled deferentially.
‘Papa Zhang has come to pay his respects, Grannie.’
‘Help him, then!’ said Grandmother Jia; and Cousin Zhen hurried back to where
Abbot Zhang was waiting a few yards behind him and supported him by an elbow
into her presence. The abbot prefaced his greeting with a good deal of jovial laughter.
‘Blessed Buddha of Boundless Life! And how has Your Old Ladyship been all this
while? In rude good health, I trust? And Their Ladyships, and all the younger ladies?
— also flourishing? It’s quite a while since I was at the mansion to call on Your Old
Ladyship, but I declare you look more blooming than ever!’
‘And how are you, old Holy One?’ Grandmother Jia asked him with a pleased smile.
‘Thank Your Old Ladyship for asking. I still keep pretty fit. But never mind about
that. What I want to know is, how’s our young hero been keeping, eh? We were
celebrating the blessed Nativity of the Veiled King here on the twenty-sixth. Very
select little gathering. Tasteful offerings. I thought our young friend might have
enjoyed it; but when I sent round to invite him, they told me he was out.’
‘He really was out,’ said Grandmother Jia, and turned aside to summon the ‘young
hero’; but Bao-yu had gone to the lavatory. He came hurrying forward presently.
‘Hallo, Papa Zhang! How are you?’
The old Taoist embraced him affectionately and returned his greeting.
‘He’s beginning to fill out,’ he said, addressing Grand?mother Jia.
‘He looks well enough on the outside,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘but underneath he’s
delicate. And his Pa doesn’t improve matters by forcing him to study all the time. I’m
afraid he’ll end up by making the child ill.’
‘Lately I’ve been seeing calligraphy and poems of his in all kinds of places,’ said
Abbot Zhang, ‘— all quite remarkably good. I really can’t understand why Sir Zheng is
concerned that the boy doesn’t study enough. If you ask me, I think he’s all right as
he is.’ He sighed. ‘Of course, you know who this young man reminds me of, don’t you?
Whether it’s his looks or the way he talks or the way he moves, to me he’s the spit
and image of Old Sir Jia.’
The old man’s eyes grew moist, and Grandmother Jia her?self showed a disposition
to be tearful.
‘It’s quite true,’ she said. ‘None of our children or our children’s children turned out
like him, except my Bao. Only my little Jade Boy is like his grandfather.’
‘Of course, your generation wouldn’t remember Old Sir Jia,’ Abbot Zhang said,
turning to Cousin Zhen. ‘It’s before your time. In fact, I don’t suppose even Sir She
and Sir Zheng can have a very clear recollection of what their father was like in his
prime.’
He brightened as another topic occurred to him and once more quaked with laughter.
‘I saw a most attractive young lady when I was out visiting the other day. Fourteen
this year. Seeing her put me in mind of our young friend here. It must be about time
we started thinking about a match for him, surely? In looks, intelligence, breeding,
background this girl was ideally suited. What does Your Old Ladyship feel? I didn’t
want to rush matters. I thought I’d better first wait and see what Your Old Ladyship
thought before saying anything to the family.’
‘A monk who once told the boy’s fortune said that he was not to marry young,’ said
Grandmother Jia; ‘so I think we had better wait until he is a little older before we
arrange any?thing definite. But do by all means go on inquiring for us. It doesn’t
matter whether the family is wealthy or not; as long as the girl looks all right, you can
let me know. Even if it’s a poor family, we can always help out over the expenses.
Money is no problem. It’s looks and character that count.’
‘Now come on, Papa Zhang!’ said Xi-feng when this exchange had ended. Where’s
that new amulet for my little girl? You had the nerve to send someone round the
other day for gosling satin, and of course, as we didn’t want to embar?rass the old
man by refusing, we had to send you some. So now what about that amulet?’
Abbot Zhang once more quaked with laughter.
‘Ho! ho! ho! You can tell how bad my eyes are getting; I didn’t even see you there,
dear lady, or I should have thanked you for the satin. Yes, the amulet has been ready
for some time. I was going to send it to you two days ago, but then Her Grace
unexpectedly asked us for this Pro Viventibus and I stupidly forgot all about it. It’s
still on the high altar being sanctified. I’ll go and get it for you.’
He went off, surprisingly nimbly, to the main hall of the temple and returned after a
short while carrying the amulet on a little tea-tray, using a red satin book-wrap as a
tray-cloth. Baby’s nurse took the amulet from him, and he was just about to receive
the little girl from her arms when he caught sight of Xi-feng laughing at him
mockingly.
‘Why didn’t you bring it in your hand?’ she asked him.
‘The hands get so sweaty in this weather,’ he said. ‘I thought a tray would be more
hygienic.’
‘You gave me quite a fright when I saw you coming in with that tray,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I
thought for one moment you were going to take up a collection!’
There was a loud burst of laughter from the assembled company. Even Cousin Zhen
was unable to restrain himself.
‘Monkey! Monkey!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Aren’t you afraid of going to the Hell of
Scoffers when you die and hav?ing your tongue cut out?’
‘Oh, Papa and I say what we like to each other,’ said Xi-feng. ‘He’s always telling me
I must “acquire merit” and threatening me with a short life if I don’t pay up quickly.
That’s right, isn’t it Papa?’
‘As a matter of fact I did have an ulterior motive in bringing this tray,’ said Abbot
Zhang, laughing, ‘but it wasn’t in order to make a collection, I assure you. I wanted to
ask this young gentleman here if he would be so very kind as to lend me the famous
jade for a few minutes. The tray is for carrying it out?side on, so that my Taoist
friends, some of whom have travelled long distances to be here, and my old students,
and their students, all of whom are gathered here today, may have the privilege of
examining it.’
‘My dear good man, in that case let the boy go with it round his neck and show it to
them himself!’ said Grand?mother Jia. ‘No need for all this running to and fro with
trays — at your age, too!’
‘Most kind! Most considerate! — But Your Old Ladyship is deceived,’ said the abbot.
‘I may look my eighty years, but I’m still hale and hearty. No, the point is that with so
many of them here today and the weather so hot, the smell is sure to be somewhat
overpowering. Our young friend here is cer?tainly not used to it. We shouldn’t want
him to be overcome by the – ah - effluvia, should we?’
Hearing this, Grandmother Jia told Bao-yu to take off the Magic Jade and put it on
the tray. Abbot Zhang draped the crimson cloth over his hands, grasped the tray
between satin-covered thumbs and fingers, and, holding it like a sacred relic at eye
level in front of him, conveyed it reverently from the courtyard.
Grandmother Jia and the others now continued their sight?seeing. They had finished
with everything at ground level and were about to mount the stairs into the galleries
when Cousin Zhen came up to report that Abbot Zhang had re?turned with the jade.
He was followed by the smiling figure of the abbot, holding the tray in the same
reverential manner as before.
‘Well, they’ve all seen the jade now,’ he said, ‘— and very grateful they were. They
agreed that it really is a most remark?able object, and they regretted that they had
nothing of value to show their appreciation with. Here you are! — this is the best
they could do. These are all little Taoist trinkets they happened to have about them.
Nothing very special, I’m afraid; but they’d like our young friend to keep them, either
to amuse himself with or to give away to his friends.’
Grandmother Jia looked at the tray. It was covered with jewellery. There were golden
crescents, jade thumb-rings and a lot of ‘motto’ jewellery — a tiny sceptre and
persimmons with the rebus-meaning ‘success in all things’, a little quail and a vase
with corn-stalks meaning ‘peace throughout the years’, and many other designs — all
in gold — or jade — work, and much of it inlaid with pearls and precious stones.
Altogether there must have been about forty pieces.
‘What have you been up to, you naughty old man?’ she said. ‘Those men are all
poor priests - they can’t afford to give things like this away. You really shouldn’t have
done this. We can’t possibly accept them.’
‘It was their own idea, I do assure you,’ said the abbot. ‘There was nothing I could
do to stop them. If you refuse to take these things, I am afraid you will destroy my
credit with these people. They will say that I cannot really have the connection with
your honoured family that I have always claimed to have.’
After this Grandmother Jia could no longer decline. She told one of the servants to
receive the tray.
‘We obviously can’t refuse, Grannie, after what Papa Zhang has just said,’ said
Bao-yu; ‘but I really have no use for this stuff. Why not let one of the boys carry it
outside for me and I’ll distribute it to the poor?’
‘I think that’s a very good idea,’ said Grandmother Jia.
But Abbot Zhang thought otherwise and hastily inter?vened:
‘I’m sure it does our young friend credit, this charitable impulse. However.
Although these things are, as I said, of no especial value, they are — what shall I say
— objects of virtù, and if you give them to the poor, in the first place the poor won’t
have much use for them, and in the second place the objects themselves will get
spoiled. If you want to give something to the poor, a largesse of money would, I
suggest, be far more appropriate.’
‘Very well, look after this stuff for me, then,’ said Bao-yu to the servant, ‘and this
evening you will distribute a largesse.’
This being now settled, Abbot Zhang withdrew, and Grandmother Jia and her party
went up to the galleries. Grandmother Jia sat with Bao-yu and the girls in the gallery
facing the stage and Xi-feng and Li Wan sat in the east gallery. The maids all sat in the
west gallery and took it in turns to go off and wait on their mistresses.
Not long after they were all seated, Cousin Zhen came up?stairs to say that the gods
had now chosen which plays were to be performed — by which was meant, of course,
that the names had been shaken from a pot in front of the altar, since this was the
only way in which the will of the gods could be known. The first play selected was
The White Serpent.
‘What’s the story?’ said Grandmother Jia.
Cousin Zhen explained that it was about the emperor Gao-?zu, founder of the Han
dynasty, who began his rise to great?ness by decapitating a monstrous white snake.
The second choice was A Heap of Honours, which shows the sixtieth birthday party
of the great Tang general Guo Zi-yi, attended by his seven sons and eight sons-in-law,
all of whom held high office, the ‘heap of honours’ of the title being a reference to
the table in his reception-hall piled high with their insignia.
‘It seems a bit conceited to have this second one played,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘Still, if that’s what the gods chose, I suppose we’d better have it. What’s the third
one going to be?’
‘The South Branch,’ said Cousin Zhen.
Grandmother Jia was silent. She knew that The South Branch likens the world to an
ant-heap and tells a tale of power and glory which turns out in the end to have been
a dream.
Hearing no reply, Cousin Zhen went off downstairs again to see about the Offertory
Scroll, which had to be ceremonially burnt in front of the holy images along with
paper money and paper ingots before the theatrical performance could begin.
Our record omits any description of that ceremony and moves back to Bao-yu, who
was sitting in the central gallery beside his grandmother, and who now called for a
maid to bring the tray up so that he could put on his Magic Jade again. When he had
done so, he began to pick over the other trinkets with which the tray was covered
and to hand them one by one to Grandmother Jia for her inspection. Her atten?tion
was taken by a little red-gold kylin with kingfisher-feather inlay. She stretched out her
hand to take it.
‘Now where have I seen something like this before?’ she said. ‘I feel certain I’ve
seen some girl wearing an ornament like this.’
‘Cousin Shi’s got one,’ said Bao-chai. ‘It’s the same as this one only a little smaller.’
‘Funny!’ said Bao-yu. ‘All the times she’s been to our house, I don’t remember ever
having seen it.’
‘Cousin Ban is observant,’ said Tan-chun. ‘No matter what it is, she remembers
everything.’
‘Well, perhaps not quite everything,’ said Dai-yu wryly. ‘But she’s certainly very
observant where things like this are con?cerned.’
Bao-chai turned her head away and pretended not to have heard.
Now that he knew the kylin on the tray was like one that Shi Xiang-yun wore, Bao-yu
hurriedly picked it up and thrust it inside his jacket. But no sooner had he done so
than it occurred to him that his action might be misconstrued; so instead of dropping
it into his inside pocket, he continued to hold it there, at the same time glancing
about him furtively to see if he had been observed. None of the others seemed to
have noticed except Dai-yu, who was staring at him fixedly and nodding her head in
mock approval.
Bao-yu felt suddenly embarrassed. Drawing his hand out again with the ornament
still in it, he returned her look and laughed sheepishly:
‘It’s rather nice, isn’t it? I thought I’d keep it for you,’ he said. ‘When we get home
we can thread it on a ribbon and you’ll be able to wear it.’
Dai-yu tossed her head.
‘I don’t want it!’
‘If you don’t want it, I’ll keep it for myself, then,’ said Bao?-yu, and popped it once
more inside his jacket.
He was about to add something, but just at that moment Cousin Zhen’s wife, You-shi,
and his new daughter-in-law, Hu-shi, arrived and came upstairs to pay their respects
to Grandmother Jia.
‘ Now why have you come here? You really shouldn’t have bothered,’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘We only came to amuse ourselves. It isn’t a formal visit.’
No sooner had she said this than it was announced that representatives from General
Feng’s household had arrived. It appeared that Feng Zi-ying’s mother, hearing that
the Jia ladies were having a Pro Viventibus performed at the Taoist temple, had
immediately prepared an offering of pork, mutton, incense, tea and cakes and sent it
post-haste to the temple with her compliments. Xi-feng, hearing the announcement,
came hurrying round to the central gallery. She clapped her hands and laughed.
‘Dear oh dear! This is something I hadn’t bargained for. My idea was a quiet little
outing for us girls; but here is everyone sending offerings and behaving as if we’d
come here for a high mass or something. It’s all your fault, Grannie! And we haven’t
even got any vails ready to give to the beaters.’
Even as she said this, two stewardesses from the Feng house?hold were already
mounting the stairs. And before ‘hey had gone, other messengers arrived with
offerings from Vice-president Zhao’s lady. From then on it was a steady stream:
friends, kinsmen, family connections, business associates - all who had heard that the
Jia ladies were holding a Pro Viven?tibus sent their representatives along with
offerings and com?plimentary messages. Grandmother Jia began to regret that she
had ever come.
‘It isn’t as if we’d come here for the ceremony,’ she grumb?led. ‘We only wanted to
enjoy ourselves. But all we seem to have done is to have stirred up a lot of fuss.’
Consequently, although she stayed and watched the plays for that day, she returned
home fairly early in the afternoon and next day professed herself too lacking in
energy to go again. Xi-feng reacted differently. ‘In for a penny, in for a pound’ was her
motto. They had already had the fuss; and since the players were there anyway, they
might as well go again today and enjoy themselves in peace.
For Bao-yu the whole of the previous day had been spoilt by Abbot Zhang’s proposal
to Grandmother Jia to arrange a match for him. He came home in a thoroughly bad
temper and kept telling everyone that he would ‘never see Abbot Zhang again as
long as he lived’. Not associating his ill-humour with the abbot’s proposal, the others
were mystified.
Grandmother Jia’s unwillingness was further reinforced by the fact that Dai-yu, since
her return home yesterday, had been suffering from mild sunstroke. What with one
thing and another, the old lady declined absolutely to go again, and Xi-?feng had to
make up her own party and go by herself.
But Xi-feng’s play-going does not concern us.

*
Bao-yu, believing that Dai-yu’s sunstroke was serious and that she might even be in
danger of her life, was so worried that he could not eat, and rushed round in the
middle of the lunch-hour to see how she was. He found her neither as ill as he had
feared nor as responsive as he might have hoped.
‘Why don’t you go and watch your plays?’ she asked him. ‘What are you mooning
about at home for?’
Abbot Zhang’s recent attempt at match-making had profoundly distressed Bao-yu
and he was shocked by her seeming indifference.
‘I can forgive the others for not understanding what has upset me,’ he thought; ‘but
that she should want to trifle with me at a time like this…!’
The sense that she had failed him made the annoyance he now felt with her a
hundred times greater than it had been on any previous occasion. Never could any
other person have stirred him to such depths of atrabilious rage. Coming from other
lips, her words would scarcely have touched him. Com?ing from hers, they put him in
a passion. His face darkened.
‘It’s all along been a mistake, then,’ he said. ‘You’re not what I took you for.’
Dai-yu gave an unnatural little laugh.
‘Not what you took me for? That’s hardly surprising, is it? I haven’t got that little
something which would have made me worthy of you.’
Bao-yu came tight up to her and held his face close to hers:
‘You do realize, don’t you, that you are deliberately willing my death?’
Dai-yu could not for the moment understand what he was talking about.
‘I swore an oath to you yesterday,’ he went on. ‘I said that I hoped Heaven might
strike me dead if this “gold and jade” business meant anything to me. Since you have
now brought it up again, it’s clear to me that you want me to die. Though what you
hope to gain by my death I find it hard to imagine.’
Dai-yu now remembered what had passed between them on the previous day. She
knew that she was wrong to have spoken as she did, and felt both ashamed and a
little frightened. Her shoulders started shaking and she began to cry.
‘May Heaven strike me dead if I ever willed your death!’ she said. ‘But I don’t see
what you have to get so worked up about. It’s only because of what Abbot Zhang said
about arranging a match for you. You’re afraid he might interfere with your precious
“gold and jade” plans; and because you’re angry about that, you have to come along
and take it out on me — That’s all it is, isn’t it?’
Bao-yu had from early childhood manifested a streak of morbid sensibility, which
being brought up in close proximity with a nature so closely in harmony with his own
had done little to improve. Now that he had reached an age when both his
experience and the reading of forbidden books had taught him something about
‘worldly matters’, he had begun to take a rather more grown-up interest in girls. But
although there were plenty of young ladies of outstanding beauty and breed?ing
among the Jia family’s numerous acquaintance, none of them, in his view, could
remotely compare with Dai-yu. For some time now his feeling for her had been a
very special one; but precisely because of this same morbid sensibility, he had shrunk
from telling her about it. Instead, whenever he was feeling particularly happy or
particularly cross, he would in?vent all sorts of ways of probing her to find out if this
feeling for her was reciprocated. It was unfortunate for him that Dai-yu herself
possessed a similar streak of morbid sensibility and disguised her real feelings, as he
did his, while attempting to discover what he felt about her.
Here was a situation, then, in which both parties concealed their real emotions and
assumed counterfeit ones in an en?deavour to find out what the real feelings of the
other party were. And because when false meets false the truth will oft-times out,
there was the constant possibility that the innumerable little frustrations that were
engendered by all this concealment would eventually erupt into a quarrel.
Take the present instance. What Bao-yu was actually think?ing at this moment was
something like this:
‘In my eyes and in my thoughts there is no one else but you. I can forgive the others
for not knowing this, but surely you ought to realize? If at a time like this you can’t
share my anxiety — if you can think of nothing better to do than provoke me with
that sort of silly talk, it shows that the concern I feel for you every waking minute of
the day is wasted: that you just don’t care about me at all.’
This was what he thought; but of course be didn’t say it. On her side Dai-yu’s
thoughts were somewhat as follows:
‘I know you must care for me a little bit, and I’m sure you don’t take this ridiculous
“gold and jade” talk seriously. But if you cared only for me and had absolutely no
inclination at all in another direction, then every time I mentioned “gold and jade”
you would behave quite naturally and let it pass almost as if you hadn’t noticed. How
is it, then, that when I do refer to it you get so excited? It shows that it must be on
your mind. You pretend to be upset in order to allay my suspicions.’
Meanwhile a quite different thought was running through Bao-yu’s mind.
‘I would do anything — absolutely anything,’ he was think?ing, ‘if only you would
be nice to me. If you would be nice to me, I would gladly die for you this moment. It
doesn’t really matter whether you know what I feel for you or not. Just be nice to me,
then at least we shall be a little closer to each other, instead of so horribly far apart.’
At the same time Dai-yu was thinking:
‘Never mind me. Just be your own natural self. If yon were all right, I should be all
right too. All these manoeuvrings to try and anticipate my feelings don’t bring us any
closer to?gether; they merely draw us farther apart.’
The percipient reader will no doubt observe that these two young people were
already of one mind, but that the com?plicated procedures by which they sought to
draw together were in fact having precisely the opposite effect. Complacent reader!
Permit us to remind you that your correct under?standing of the situation is due
solely to the fact that we have been revealing to you the secret, innermost thoughts
of those two young persons, which neither of them had so far ever felt able to
express.
Let us now return from the contemplation of inner thoughts to the recording of
outward appearances.
When Dai-yu, far from saying something nice to him, once more made reference to
the ‘gold and jade’, Bao-yu became so choked with rage that for a moment he was
quite literally bereft of speech. Frenziedly snatching the ‘Magic Jade’ from his neck
and holding it by the end of its silken cord he gritted his teeth and dashed it against
the floor with all the strength in his body.
‘Beastly thing!’ he shouted. ‘I’ll smash you to pieces and put an end to this once
and for all.’
But the jade, being exceptionally hard and resistant, was not the tiniest bit damaged.
Seeing that he had not broken it, Bao-yu began to look around for something to
smash it with. Dai-yu, still crying, saw what he was going to do.
‘Why smash a dumb, lifeless object?’ she said. ‘If you want to smash something, let
it be me.’
The sound of their quarrelling brought Nightingale and Snowgoose hurrying in to
keep the peace. They found Bao-yu apparently bent on destroying his jade and tried
to wrest it from him. Failing to do so, and sensing that the quarrel was of more than
usual dimensions, they went off to fetch Aroma. Aroma came back with them as fast
as she could run and eventually succeeded in prising the jade from his hand. He
glared at her scornfully.
‘It’s my own thing I’m smashing,’ he said. ‘What business is it of yours to interfere?’
Aroma saw that his face was white with anger and his eyes wild and dangerous.
Never had she seen him in so terrible a rage. She took him gently by the hand:
‘You shouldn’t smash the jade just because of a disagree?ment with your cousin,’
she said. ‘What do you think she would feel like and what sort of position would it
put her in if you really were to break it?’
Dai-yu heard these words through her sobs. They struck a responsive chord in her
breast, and she wept all the harder to think that even Aroma seemed to understand
her better than Bao-yu did. So much emotion was too much for her weak stomach.
Suddenly there was a horrible retching noise and up came the tisane of elsholtzia
leaves she had taken only a short while before. Nightingale quickly held out her
handkerchief to receive it and, while Snowgoose rubbed and pounded her back,
Dai-yu continued to retch up wave upon wave of watery vomit, until the whole
handkerchief was soaked with it.
‘However cross you may be, Miss, you ought to have more regard for your health,’
said Nightingale. ‘You’d only just taken that medicine and you were beginning to feel
a little bit better for it, and now because of your argument with Master Bao you’ve
gone and brought it all up again. Suppose you were to be really ill as a consequence.
How do you think Master Bao would feel?’
When Bao-yu heard these words they struck a responsive chord in his breast, and he
reflected bitterly that even Nightin?gale seemed to understand him better than
Dai-yu But then he looked again at Dai-yu, who was sobbing and panting by turns,
and whose red and swollen face was wet with perspira?tion and tears, and seeing
how pitiably frail and ill she looked, his heart misgave him.
‘I shouldn’t have taken her up on that “gold and jade” business,’ he thought. ‘I’ve
got her into this state and now there’s no way in which I can relieve her by sharing
what she suffers.’ As he thought this, he, too, began to cry.
Now that Bao-yu and Dai-yu were both crying, Aroma instinctively drew towards her
master to comfort him. A pang of pity for him passed through her and she squeezed
his hand sympathetically. It was as cold as ice. She would have liked to tell him not to
cry but hesitated, partly from the consideration that he might be suffering from some
deep-concealed hurt which crying would do something to relieve, and partly from
the fear that to do so in Dai-yu’s presence might seem pre?sumptuous. Torn between
a desire to speak and fear of the possible consequences of speaking, she did what
girls of her type often do when faced with a difficult decision: she avoided the
necessity of making one by bursting into tears.
As for Nightingale, who had disposed of the handkerchief of vomited tisane and was
now gently fanning her mistress with her fan, seeing the other three all standing
there as quiet as mice with the tears streaming down their faces, she was so
affected by the sight that she too started crying and was obliged to have recourse to
a second handkerchief.
There the four of them stood, then, facing each other; all of them crying; none of
them saying a word. It was Aroma who broke the silence with a strained and nervous
laugh.
‘You ought not to quarrel with Miss Lin,’ she said to Bao-yu, ‘if only for the sake of
this pretty cord she made you.’
At these words Dai-yu, ill as she was, darted forward, grabbed the jade from Aroma’s
hand, and snatching up a pair of scissors that were lying nearby, began feverishly
cutting at its silken cord with them. Before Aroma and Nightingale could stop her, she
had already cut it into several pieces.
‘It was a waste of time making it,’ she sobbed. ‘He doesn’t really care for it. And
there’s someone else who’ll no doubt make him a better one!’
‘What a shame!’ said Aroma, retrieving the jade. ‘It’s all my silly fault. I should have
kept my mouth shut.’
‘Go on! Cut away!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I shan’t be wearing the wretched thing again
anyway, so it doesn’t matter.’
Preoccupied with the quarrel, the four of them had failed to notice several old
women, who had been drawn by the sound of it to investigate. Apprehensive, when
they saw Dai?-yu hysterically weeping and vomiting and Bao-yu trying to smash his
jade, of the dire consequences to be expected from a scene of such desperate
passion, they had hurried off in a body to the front of the mansion to report the
matter to Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang, hoping in this way to establish in advance
that whatever the consequences might be, they were not responsible for them. From
their precipitate entry and the grave tone of their announcement Grandmother Jia
and Lady Wang assumed that some major catastrophe had befallen and hurried with
them into the Garden to find out what it was.
Their arrival filled Aroma with alarm. ‘What did Nightin?gale want to go troubling
Their Ladyships for?’ she thought crossly, supposing that the talebearer had been
sent to them by Nightingale; while Nightingale for her part was angry with Aroma,
thinking that the talebearer must have been one of Aroma’s minions.
Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang entered the room to find a silent Bao-yu and a silent
Dai-yu, neither of whom, when questioned, would admit that anything at all was the
matter. They therefore visited their wrath on the beads of the two unfortunate maids,
insisting that it was entirely owing to their negligence that matters had got so much
out of hand. Unable to defend themselves, the girls were obliged to endure a long
and abusive dressing-down, after which Grandmother Jia concluded the affair by
carrying Bao-yu off to her own apart?ment.
Next day, the third of the fifth month, was Xue Pan’s birthday and there was a family
party with plays, to which the Jias were all invited. Bao-yu, who had still not seen
Dai-yu since his outburst — which he now deeply regretted — was feeling far too
dispirited to care about seeing plays, and declined to go on the ground that he was
feeling unwell.
Dai-yu, though somewhat overcome on the day previous to this by the sultry weather,
had by no means been seriously ill. Arguing that if she was not ill, it was impossible
that he should be, she felt sure, when she heard of Bao-yu’s excuse, that it must be a
false one.
‘He usually enjoys drinking and watching plays,’ she thought. ‘If he’s not going, it
must be because he is still angry about yesterday; or if it isn’t that, it must be
because he’s heard that I’m not going and doesn’t want to go without me. Oh! I
should never have cut that cord! Now he won’t ever wear his jade again - unless I
make him another cord to wear it on.’
So she, too, regretted the quarrel.
Grandmother Jia knew that Bao-yu and Dai-yu were angry with each other, but she
had been assuming that they would see each other at the Xues’ party and make it up
there. When neither of them turned up at it, she became seriously upset.
‘I’m a miserable old sinner,’ she grumbled. It must be my punishment for something
I did wrong in a past life to have to live with a pair of such obstinate, addle-headed
little geese! I’m sure there isn’t a day goes by without their giving me some fresh
cause for anxiety. It must he fate. That’s what it says in the proverb, after all:
                       ’Tis Fate brings foes and lo’es tegither.
I’ll be glad when I’ve drawn my last breath and closed my old eyes for the last time;
then the two of them can snap and snarl at each other to their hearts’ content, for I
shan’t be there to see it, and “what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve”.
The Lord knows, it’s not my wish to drag on this wearisome life any longer!’
Amidst these muttered grumblings the old lady began to cry.
In due course her words were transmitted to Bao-yu and Dai-yu. It happened that
neither of them had ever heard the saying
                       ’Tis Fate brings foes and lo’es tegither,

and its impact on them, hearing it for the first time, was like that of a Zen
‘perception’ something to be meditated on with bowed head and savoured with a
gush of tears. Though they had still not made it up since their quarrel, the difference
between them had now vanished completely:
                In Naiad’s House one to the wind made moan,
                In Green Delights one to the moon complained,
to parody the well-known lines. Or, in homelier verses:

                 Though each was in a different place,
                 Their hearts in friendship beat as one.

On the second day after their quarrel Aroma deemed that the time was now ripe for
urging a settlement.
‘Whatever the rights and wrongs of all this may be,’ she said to Bao-yu, ‘you are
certainly the one who is most to blame. Whenever in the past you’ve heard about a
quarrel between one of the pages and one of the girls, you’ve always said that the
boy was a brute for not understanding the girl’s feelings better — yet here you are
behaving in exactly the same way yourself! Tomorrow will be the Double Fifth. Her
Old Ladyship will be really angry if the two of you are still at daggers drawn on the
day of the festival, and that will make life difficult for all of us. Why not put your
pride in your pocket and go and say you are sorry, so that we can all get back to
normal again?’
But as to whether or not Bao-yu followed her advice, or, if he did so, what the effect
of following it was - those ques?tions will be dealt with in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 30

Bao-chai speaks of a fan and castigates her deriders
Charmante scratches a ‘qiang’ and mystifies a beholder

Dai-yu, as we have shown, regretted her quarrel with Bao-yu almost as soon as it was
over; but since there were no con?ceivable grounds on which she could run after him
and tell him so, she continued, both day and night, in a state of un?relieved
depression that made her feel almost as if a part of her was lost. Nightingale had a
shrewd idea how it was with her and resolved at last to tackle her:
‘I think the day before yesterday you were too hasty, Miss. We ought to know what
things Master Bao is touchy about, if no one else does. Look at all the quarrels we’ve
had with him in the past on account of that jade!’
‘Poh!’ said Dai-yu scornfully. ‘You are trying to make out that it was my fault
because you have taken his side against me. Of course I wasn’t too hasty.’
Nightingale gave her a quizzical smile.
‘No? Then why did you cut that cord up? If three parts of the blame was Bao-yu’s,
I’m sure at least seven parts of it was yours. From what I’ve seen of it, he’s all right
with you when you allow him to be; it’s because you’re so prickly with him and
always trying to put him in the wrong that he gets worked up.’
Dai-yu was about to retort when they heard someone at the courtyard gate calling to
be let in. Nightingale turned to listen:
‘That’s Bao-yu’s voice,’ she said. ‘I expect he has come to apologize.’
‘I forbid you to let him in,’ said Dai-yu.
‘There you go again!’ said Nightingale. ‘You’re going to keep him standing outside in
the blazing sun on a day like this. Surely that’s wrong, if nothing else is?’
She was moving outside, even as she said this, regardless of her mistress’s injunction.
Sure enough, it was Bao-yu. She un?fastened the gate and welcomed him in with a
friendly smile.
‘Master Bao! I was beginning to think you weren’t coming to see us any more, I
certainly didn’t expect to see you here again so soon.’
‘Oh, you’ve been making a mountain out of a molehill,’ said Bao-yu, returning her
smile. ‘Why ever shouldn’t I come? Even if I died, my ghost would be round here a
hundred times a day. How is my cousin? Quite better now?’
‘Physically she’s better,’ said Nightingale, ‘but she’s still in very poor spirits.’
‘Ah yes — I know she’s upset.’
This exchange took place as they were crossing the fore?court. He now entered the
room. Dai-yu was sitting on the bed crying. She had not been crying to start with, but
the bittersweet pang she experienced when she heard his arrival had started the
tears rolling. Bao-yu went up to the bed and smiled down at her.
‘How are you, coz? Quite better now?’
As Dai-yu seemed to be too busy wiping her eyes to make a reply, he sat down close
beside her on the edge of the bed:
‘I know you’re not really angry with me,’ he said. ‘It’s just that if the others noticed I
wasn’t coming here, they would think we had been quarrelling; and if we waited for
them to interfere, we should be allowing other people to come be?tween us. It
would be better to hit me and shout at me now and get it over with, if you still bear
any hard feelings, than to go on ignoring me. Coz dear! Coz dear! -’
He must have repeated those same two words in the same tone of passionate
entreaty upwards of twenty times. Dai-yu had been meaning to ignore him, but what
he had just been saying about other people ‘coming between’ them seemed to prove
that he must in some way feel closer to her than the rest, and she was unable to
maintain her silence.
‘You don’t have to treat me like a child,’ she blurted out tearfully. ‘From now on I
shall make no further claims on you. You can behave exactly as if I had gone away.’
‘Gone away?’ said Bao-yu laughingly. ‘Where would you go to?’
‘Back home.’
‘I’d follow you.’
‘As if I were dead then.’
‘If you died,’ he said, ‘I should become a monk.’
Dai-yu’s face darkened immediately:
‘What an utterly idiotic thing to say! Suppose your own sisters were to die? Just
how many times can one person become a monk? I think I had better see what the
others think about that remark.’
Bao-yu had realized at once that she would be offended; but the words were already
out of his mouth before he could stop them. He turned very red and hung his head in
silence. It was a good thing that no one else was in the room at that moment to see
him. Dai-yu glared at him for some seconds - evidently too enraged to speak, for she
made a sound somewhere be?tween a snort and a sigh, but said nothing - then,
seeing him almost purple in the face with suppressed emotion, she clenched her
teeth, pointed her finger at him, and, with an indignant ‘Hmn!’, stabbed the air quite
savagely a few inches away from his forehead:
‘You—!’
But whatever it was she had been going to call him never got said. She merely gave a
sigh and began wiping her eyes again with her handkerchief.
Bao-yu had been in a highly emotional state when he came to see Dai-yu and it had
further upset him to have inadvertent?ly offended her so soon after his arrival. This
angry gesture and the unsuccessful struggle, ending in sighs and tears, to say what
she wanted to say now affected him so deeply that he, too, began to weep. In need
of a handkerchief but finding that he had come out without one, he wiped his eyes
on his sleeve.
Although Dai-yu was crying, the spectacle of Bao-yu using the sleeve of his
brand-new lilac-coloured summer gown as a handkerchief had not escaped her, and
while continuing to wipe her own eyes with one hand, she leaned over and reached
with the other for the square of silk that was draped over the head-rest at the end of
the bed. She lifted it off and threw it at him — all without uttering a word - then,
once more burying her face in her own handkerchief, resumed her weeping. Bao-?yu
picked up the handkerchief she had thrown him and hur?riedly wiped his eyes with it.
When he had dried them, he drew up close to her again and took one of her hands in
his own, smiling at her gently.
‘I don’t know why you go on crying,’ he said. ‘I feel as if all my insides were
shattered. Come! Let’s go and see Grandmother together.’
Dai-yu flung off his hand.
‘Take your hands off me! We’re not children any more. You really can’t go on
mauling me about like this all the time. Don’t you understand anything —?’
‘Bravo!’
The shouted interruption startled them both. They spun round to look just as Xi-feng,
full of smiles, came bustling into the room.
‘Grandmother has been grumbling away something awful,’ she said. ‘She insisted
that I should come over and see if you were both all right. “Oh,” I said, “there’s no
need to go and look, Grannie; they’ll have made it up by now without any
interference from us.” So she told me I was lazy. Well, here I am — and of course it’s
exactly as I said it would be. I don’t know. I don’t understand you two. What is it you
find to argue about? For every three days that you’re friends you must spend at least
two days quarrelling. You really are a couple of babies. And the older you get, the
worse you get. Look at you now — holding hands crying! And a couple of days ago
you were glaring at each other like fighting-cocks. Come on! Come with me to see
Grandmother. Let’s put the old lady’s mind at rest.’
As she said this, she seized Dai-yu’s hand and began march?ing off with her. Dai-yu
turned back and called for her maids, but there was no response.
‘What do you want to call them for?’ said Xi-feng. ‘You’ve got me to wait on you,
haven’t you?’
She continued to walk away, still holding Dai-yu by the hand. Bao-yu followed a little
way behind. They went out of the Garden and through into Grandmother Jia’s
apartment.
‘I told you they could be left to themselves to make it up and that there was no
need for you to worry,’ said Xi-feng to Grandmother Jia when they were all in the old
lady’s pre?sence; ‘but you wouldn’t believe me, would you? You insisted on my going
there to act the peacemaker. Well, I went there; and what did I find? I found the two
of them together apolo?gizing to each other. It was like the kite and the kestrel
holding hands: they were positively locked in a clinch! No need of a peacemaker that
I could see.’
There was a burst of laughter from all present. Bao-chai was among these, but Dai-yu
slipped past her without speaking and took a seat next to Grandmother Jia. Bao-yu,
rather at a loss for something to say, turned to Bao-chai.
‘I’m afraid I’ wasn’t very well on your brother’s birthday; so apart from not giving
him a present, I couldn’t even make him a kotow this year. I’m afraid he may not have
realized I was ill and thought that I was merely making excuses. If you can spare a
moment next time you see him, I do hope you will explain to him for me.’
Bao-chai looked amused.
‘That seems a trifle excessive. I am sure he would have felt uncomfortable about
your kotowing to him, even if you had been able to come; so I’m quite sure he
wouldn’t have wanted you to come when you weren’t feeling well. It would be rather
unfriendly, surely, if cousins who see each other all the time were to start worrying
about trifles like that?’
Bao-yu smiled.
‘Well, as long as yon understand, that’s all right. But why aren’t you watching the
players?’
‘I can’t stand the heat,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I did watch a couple of acts of something,
but it was so hot that I couldn’t stay any longer. Unfortunately none of the guests
showed any sign of going, so I had to pretend I was ill in order to get away.’
‘Touché!’ thought Bao-yu; but he hid his embarrassment in a stupid laugh.
‘No wonder they compare you to Yang Gui-fei, cousin. You are well-covered like her,
and they always say that plump people fear the heat.’
The colour flew into Bao-chai’s face. An angry retort was on her lips, but she could
hardly make it in front of company. Yet reflection only made her angrier. Eventually,
after a scorn?ful sniff or two, she said:
‘I may be like Yang Gui-fei in some respects, but I don’t think there is much danger
of my cousin becoming a Prime Minister.’
It happened that just at that moment a very young maid called ‘Prettikins’ jokingly
accused Bao-chai of having hid?den a fan she was looking for.
‘I know Miss Bao’s hidden it,’ she said, ‘Come on, Miss! Please let me have it.’
‘You be careful,’ said Bao-chai, pointing at the girl angrily and speaking with
unwonted stridency. ‘When did you last see me playing games of this sort with
anyone? If there are other young ladies who are in the habit of romping about with
you, you had better ask them.’
Prettikins fled.
Bao-yu realized that he had once again given offence by speaking thoughtlessly; and
as this time it was in front of a lot of people, his embarrassment was correspondingly
greater. He turned aside in confusion and began talking nervously to someone else.
Bao-yu’s rudeness to Bao-chai had given Dai-yu secret satisfaction. When Prettikins
came in looking for her fan, she had been on the point of adding some facetiousness
of her own at Bao-chai’s expense; but Bao-chai’s brief explosion caused her to drop
the prepared witticism and ask instead what play the two acts were from that
Bao-chai said she had just been watching.
Bao-chai had observed the smirk on Dai-yu’s face and knew very well that Bao-yu’s
rudeness must have pleased her. The smiling answer she gave to Dai-yu’s question
was therefore not without a touch of malice.
‘The play I saw was Li Kui Abuses Song Jiang and After?wards Has to Say He Is
Sorry.’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘What a mouthful! Surely, with all your learning, cousin, you must know the proper
name of that play? It’s called The Abject Apology.’
‘The Abject Apology?’ said Bao-chai. ‘Well, no doubt you clever people know all
there is to know about abject apology. I’m afraid it’s something I wouldn’t know
about.’
Her words touched Bao-yu and Dai-yu on a sensitive spot, and by the time she had
finished, they were both blushing hotly with embarrassment.
Xi-feng was insufficiently educated to have understood all these nuances, but by
studying the speakers’ expressions she had formed a pretty good idea of what they
were talking about.
‘Rather hot weather to be eating raw ginger, isn’t it?’ she asked.
No one present could understand what she meant.
‘No one’s been eating raw ginger,’ they said.
Xi-feng affected great surprise and rubbed her cheek mean?ingfully with her hand:
‘If no one’s been eating raw ginger, then why are they look?ing so hot and
bothered?’
At this Bao-yu and Dai-yu felt even more uncomfortable. Bao-chai was about to add
something, but seeing the abject look on Bao-yu’s face, she laughed and held her
tongue. None of the others present had understood what the four of them were
talking about and treated these exchanges as a joke.
Shortly after this, when Bao-chai and Xi-feng had gone out of the room, Dai-yu said
to Bao-yu.
‘You see? There are people even more dangerous to trifle with than I. If I weren’t
such a tongue-tied, slow-witted creature, you wouldn’t get away with it quite so
often, my friend.’
Bao-yu was still smarting from Bao-chai’s testiness. To be set upon now by Dai-yu as
well seemed positively the last straw. But though he wanted to reply, he knew how
easily she would take offence and controlled himself with an effort. Feel?ing in very
low spirits, he left the room himself now and went off on his own.
It was the hottest part of the day. Lunch had long been over, and in every apartment
mistress and maids alike had succumbed to the lassitude of the hour. As he sauntered
slow?ly by, hands clasped behind his back, everywhere he went was hushed in the
breathless silence of noon. From the back of Grandmother Jia’s quartets he passed
eastwards through the gallery that ended near the wall of Xi-feng’s courtyard. He
went up to the gate, but it was closed, and remembering that it was her invariable
custom when the weather was hot to take two whole hours off in the middle of the
day for her siesta, he thought he had better not go in. He continued, instead, through
the corner gate that led into his parents’ courtyard.
On entering his mother’s apartment, he found several maids dozing over their
embroidery. Lady Wang herself was lying on a summer-bed in the inner room,
apparently fast asleep. Her maid Golden, who was sitting beside her gently pounding
her legs, also seemed half asleep, for her head was nodding and her half-closed eyes
were blinking drowsily. Bao-yu tiptoed up to her and tweaked an ear-ring. She
opened her eyes wide and saw that it was Bao-yu.
He smiled at her and whispered.
‘So sleepy?’
Golden pursed her lips up in a smile, motioned to him with her hand to go away, and
then closed her eyes again. But Bao-yu lingered, fascinated. Silently craning forward
to make sure that Lady Wang’s eyes were closed, he took a Fragrant Snow ‘quencher’
from the embroidered pouch at his waist and popped it between Golden’s lips.
Golden nibbled it dreamily without opening her eyes.
‘Shall I ask Her Ladyship to let me have you, so that we can be together?’ he
whispered jokingly.
Golden made no reply.
‘When she wakes up, I’ll talk to her about it,’ he said.
Golden opened her eyes wide and gave him a little push.
‘What’s the hurry?’ she said playfully. ‘“Yours is yours, wherever it be”, as they said
to the lady when she dropped her gold comb in the well. Haven’t you ever heard that
saying? — I’ll tell you something to do, if you want a bit of fun. Go into the little east
courtyard and you’ll be able to catch Sunset and Huan together.’
‘Who cares about them?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Let’s talk about us.’ At this point Lady Wang
sat bolt upright and dealt Golden a slap in the face.
‘Shameless little harlot!’ she cried, pointing at bet wrath-fully. ‘It’s you and your like
who corrupt our innocent young boys.’
Bao-yu had slipped silently away as soon as his mother sat up. Golden, one of whose
cheeks was now burning a fiery red, was left without a word to say. The other maids,
hearing that their mistress was awake, came hurrying into the room.
‘Silver!’ said Lady Wang. ‘Go and fetch your mother. I want her to take your sister
Golden away.’
Golden threw herself, weeping, upon her knees:
‘No, Your Ladyship, please! Beat me and revile me as much as you like, but please,
for pity’s sake, don’t send me away. I’ve been with Your Ladyship nigh on ten years
now. How can I ever hold up my head again if you dismiss me?’
Lady Wang was not naturally unkind. On the contrary, she was an exceptionally
lenient mistress. This was, in fact, the first time in her life that she had ever struck a
maid. But the kind of ‘shamelessness’ of which — in her view - Golden had just been
guilty was the one thing she had always most abhorred. It was the uncontrollable
anger of the morally out?raged that had caused her to strike Golden and call her
names; and though Golden now begged and pleaded, she refused to retract her
dismissal. When Golden’s mother, old Mrs Bai, had eventually been fetched, the
wretched girl, utterly crushed by her shame and humiliation, was led away.
But of her no more.

*
Embarrassed by his mother’s awakening, Bao-yu had slipped hurriedly into the
Garden.
The burning sun was now in the height of heaven, the con?tracted shadows were
concentrated darkly beneath the trees, and the stillness of noon, filled with the harsh
trilling of cicadas, was broken by no human voice; but as he approached the bamboo
trellises of the rose-garden, a sound like a suppressed sob seemed to come from
inside the pergola. Uncer?tain what it was that he had heard, he stopped to listen.
Undoubtedly there was someone there.
This was the fifth month of the year, when the rambler roses are in fullest bloom.
Peeping through the fragrant panicles with which the pergola was smothered, he saw
a girl crouching down on the other side of the trellis, scratching at the ground with
one of those long, blunt pins that girls use for fastening their back hair with.
‘Can this be some silly maid come here to bury flowers like Frowner?’ he
wondered.
He was reminded of Zhuang-zi’s story of the beautiful Xi-?shi’s ugly neighbour, whose
endeavours to imitate the little frown that made Xi-shi captivating produced an
aspect so hideous that people ran from her in terror. The recollection of it made him
smile.
‘This is “imitating the Frowner” with a vengeance,’ he thought, ‘- if that is really
what she is doing. Not merely un?original, but downright disgusting!”
‘Don’t imitate Miss Lin,’ he was about to shout; but a glimpse of the girl’s face
revealed to him just in time that this was no maid, but one of the twelve little
actresses from Pear?-tree Court – though which of them, since he had seen them
only in their make-up on the stage, he was unable to make out. He stuck out his
tongue in a grimace and clapped a hand to his mouth.
‘Good job I didn’t speak too soon,’ he thought. ‘I’ve been in trouble twice already
today for doing that, once with Frowner and once with Chai. It only needs me to go
and upset these twelve actresses as well and I shall be well and truly in the cart!’
His efforts to identify the girl made him study her more closely. It was curious that he
should have thought her an imitator of Dai-yu, for she had much of Dai-yu’s ethereal
grace in her looks: the same delicate face and frail, slender body; the same
... brows like hills in spring,
And eyes like autumn’s limpid pools;


— even the same little frown that had often made him compare Dai-yu with Xi-shi of
the legend.
It was now quite impossible for him to tear himself away. He watched her fascinated.
As he watched, he began to see that what she was doing with the pin was not
scratching a hole to bury flowers in, but writing. He followed the movements of her
hand, and each vertical and horizontal stroke, each dot and hook that she made he
copied with a finger on the palm of his hand. Altogether there were eighteen strokes.
He thought for a moment. The character he had just written in his hand was QIANG.
The name of the roses which covered the pergola contained the same character:
‘Qiang-wei’.
‘The sight of the roses has inspired her to write a poem,’ he thought. ‘Probably
she’s just thought of a good couplet and wants to write it down before she forgets it;
or perhaps she has already composed several lines and wants to work on them a bit.
Let’s see what she writes next.’
The girl went on writing, and he followed the movements of her hand as before. It
was another QIANG. Again she wrote, and again he followed, and again it was a
QIANG. It was as though she were under some sort of spell. As soon as she had
finished writing one QIANG she began writing another.

QIANG QIANG QIANG QIANG QIANG QIANG QIANG…

He must have watched her write several dozen QIANG’s in succession. He seemed to
be as much affected by the spell on his side of the pergola as the girl herself was on
hers, for his eyeballs continued to follow her pin long after he bad learned to
anticipate its movements.
‘This girl must have something on her mind that she cannot tell anyone about to
make her behave in this way,’ he thought. ‘One can see from her outward behaviour
how much she must be suffering inwardly. And she looks so frail. Too frail for
suffering. I wish I could bear some of it for you, my dear!’
In the stifling dog-days of summer the transition from clear to overcast is often
sudden, and a little cloudlet can some?times be the harbinger of a heavy shower. As
Bao-yu watched the girl, a sudden gust of cool wind blew by, followed, within
moments, by the hissing downpour of rain. He could see the water running off her
head in streams and soaking into her clothes.
‘Oh, it’s raining! With her delicate constitution she ought not to be outside in a
downpour like this.’
In his anxiety he cried out to her involuntarily:
‘Don’t write any more. Look! You’re getting soaked.’
The girl looked up, startled, when she heard the voice. She could see someone
amidst the roses saying ‘Don’t write’; but partly because of Bao-yu’s almost girlishly
beautiful features, and partly because she could in any case only see about half of his
face, everything above and below being hidden by flowers and foliage, she took him
for a maid; so instead of rushing from his presence as she would have done if she had
known that it was Bao-yu, she smiled up at him gratefully:
‘Thank you for reminding me. But what about you? You must be getting wet too,
surely?’
‘Aiyo!’— her words made him suddenly aware that the whole of his body was icy
cold, and when he looked down, he saw that he was soaked.
‘Oh lord!’
He rushed off in the direction of Green Delights; but all the time he was worrying
about the girl, who had nowhere where she could shelter from the rain.

*

As this was the day before the Double Fifth festival, élégante and the other little
actresses — including the one whom Bao-yu had just been watching - had already
started their holiday and had gone into the Garden to amuse themselves. Two of
them, Trésor — one of the two members of the company who played Principal Boy
parts — and Topaze — one of the company’s two soubrettes — happened to be in
the House of Green Delights playing with Aroma when the rain started and prevented
their leaving. They and the maids amused themselves by blocking up the gutters and
letting the water collect in the courtyard. When it was nicely flooded, they rounded
up a number of mallards, sheldrakes, mandarin ducks and other waterfowl, tied their
wings together, and having first closed the courtyard gate, set them down in the
water to swim about. Aroma and the girls were all in the outside gallery enjoying this
spectacle when Bao-yu arrived at the gate. Finding it shut, he knocked on it for
someone to come and open up for him. But there was little chance of a knock being
heard above the excited laughter of the maids. He had to shout for some minutes
and pound the gate till it shook before anyone heard him inside.
Aroma was not expecting him back so soon.
‘I wonder who it can be at this time,’ she said. ‘Won’t someone go and answer it?’
‘It’s me!’ shouted Bao-yu.
‘That’s Miss Bao’s voice,’ said Musk.
‘Nonsense!’ said Skybright. ‘What would she be doing visiting us at this time of
day?’
‘Let me just take a peep through the crack,’ said Aroma. ‘If I think it’s all right, I’ll let
them in. We don’t want to turn anyone away in the pouring rain.’
Keeping under cover of the gallery, she made her way round to the gate and peered
through the chink between the double doors. The sight of Bao-yu standing there like
a bedraggled hen with the water running off him in streamlets was both alarming
and —she could not help but feel very funny. She opened the gate as quickly as she
could, then, when she saw him fully, clapped her hands and doubled up with
laughter.
‘Master Bao! I never thought it would be you. What did you want to come running
back in the pouring rain for?’
Bao-yu was by now in a thoroughly evil temper and had fully resolved to give
whoever opened the gate a few kicks. As soon as it was open, therefore, he lashed
out with his foot, not bothering to see who it was — for he assumed that the per?son
answering it would be one of the younger maids — and dealt Aroma a mighty kick in
the ribs that caused her to cry out in pain.
‘Worthless lot!’ he shouted. Because I always treat you decently, you think you can
get away with anything. I’m just your laughing-stock.’
It was not until he looked down and saw Aroma crying that he realized he had kicked
the wrong person.
‘Aiyo! It’s you! Where did I kick you?’
Up to this moment Aroma had never had so much as a harsh word from Bao-yu, and
the combination of shame, anger and pain she now felt on being kicked and shouted
at by him in front of so many people was well-nigh insupport?able. Nevertheless she
forced herself to bear it, reflecting that to have made an outcry would be like
admitting that it was her he had meant to kick, which she knew was almost certainly
not the case.
‘You didn’t; you missed me,’ she said. ‘Come in and get changed.’
When Bao-yu had gone indoors and was changing his clothes, he said to her jokingly:
‘In all these years this is the first time I’ve ever struck any?one in anger. Too bad
that yon should have been the one to get in the way of the blow!’
In spite of the pain, which it cost her some effort to master, Aroma was helping him
with his changing. She smiled when he said this.
‘I’m the person you always begin things with,’ she said. ‘Whether it’s big things or
little things or pleasant ones or unpleasant ones, it’s only natural that you should try
them out first on me. Only in this instance I hope that now you’ve hit me you won’t
from now on go around hitting other people.’
‘I didn’t mean to kick you, you know,’ said Bao-yu.
‘Who said you did?’ said Aroma. ‘It’s the younger ones who normally see to the
gate; and they’ve grown so insolent nowadays, it’s enough to put anyone in a rage. If
you’d given one of them a few kicks and put the fear of God into them, it would have
been a very good thing. No, it was my own silly fault. I should have made them open
the gate and not gone to open it myself.’
While they were speaking, the rain had stopped and Tresor and Topaze had left. The
pain in Aroma’s side was such that it was giving her a feeling of nausea and she could
eat no din?ner. At bedtime, when she took off her clothes, she saw a great black
bruise the size of a rice-bowl spreading over the side of her chest. The extent of it
frightened her, but she for?bore to cry out, Nevertheless even her dreams that night
were full of pain and she several times uttered an ‘Aiyo’ in the midst of her sleep.
Although it was understood that he had not kicked her deliberately, Bao-yu had felt a
little uneasy when he saw how sluggish Aroma seemed in her movements; and when,
during the night, he heard her groaning in her sleep, he knew that he must have
kicked her really hard. Getting out of bed, he picked up a lamp and tiptoed over to
have a look. Just as he reached the foot of her bed, he heard her cough a couple of
times and spit out a mouthful of something.
‘Aiyo!’
She opened her eyes wide and saw Bao-yu. Startled, she asked him what he was
doing there.
‘You’ve been groaning in your sleep,’ he said. ‘I must have hurt you badly. Let me
have a look.’
‘My head feels giddy,’ said Aroma, ‘and I’ve got a sweet, sickly taste in my throat.
Have a look on the floor.’
Bao-yu shone his lamp on the floor. Beside the bed, where she had spat, there was a
mouthful of bright red blood. He was horrified.
‘Oh, help!’
Aroma looked too, and felt the grip of fear on her heart.
The outcome will be told in the following chapter.




CHAPTER 31

A torn fan is the price of silver laughter
And a lost kylin is the clue to a happy marriage

A cold feat came over Aroma when she saw the fresh blood on the floor. She had
often heard people say that if you spat blood when you were young, you would die
early, or at the very least be an invalid all your life; and remembering this now, she
felt all her bright, ambitious hopes for the future turn into dust and ashes. Tears of
misery ran down her cheeks. The sight of them made Bao-yu, too, distressed.
‘What is it?’ he asked her.
‘It’s nothing.’ She forced herself to smile. ‘I’m all right.’
Bao-yu was all for calling one of the maids and getting her to heat some rice wine, so
that Aroma could be given hot wine and Hainan kid’s-blood pills; but Aroma, smiling
through her tears, caught at his hand to restrain him.
‘It’s all right for you to make a fuss,’ she said; ‘but if you go involving the others,
they are sure to accuse me of putting on airs. And besides, it will do neither of us any
good to draw attention to ourselves — especially when so far no one seems to have
noticed anything. The sensible thing would be for you to send one of the boys round
tomorrow to Dr Wang’s and get me some medicine to take. I shall probably be all
right again after a few doses, without a single soul knowing anything about it. Surely
that’s best, isn’t it?’
Bao-yu knew that she was right and abandoned his inten?tion of rousing the others.
Instead he poured her a cup of tea from a pot on the table and gave it to her to rinse
her mouth with. Aroma was uneasy about being waited on by her master; but fearing
that if she refused his services he would insist on disturbing everybody, she lay back
and allowed him to fuss over her.
As soon as it was daylight, Bao-yu threw on his clothes and, without even waiting to
wash or comb, went out of the Gar?den to his study in the front part of the mansion,
whither he summoned the doctor Wang Ji-ren for detailed questioning. When this
worthy had elicited the information that the hae?morrhage inquired about had been
caused by a blow, he seemed less disposed to take a serious view of the case, merely
naming some pills and giving perfunctory instructions for taking them internally and
for applying them in solution as a poultice. Bao-yu made a note of these instructions
and went back into the Garden to carry them out.
But that is no part of our story.

*

It was now the festival of the Double Fifth. Sprays of calamus and artemisia crowned
the doorways and everyone wore tiger amulets fastened on their clothing at the back.
At noon Lady Wang gave a little party at which Aunt Xue and Bao-chai were the
guests.

Bao-yu, finding Bao-chai somewhat glacial in her manner and evidently unwilling to
talk to him, knew that it must be because of his rudeness to her of the day before.
Lady Wang, observing Bao-yu’s dejected appearance, attri?buted it to
embarrassment about yesterday’s episode with Golden and ignored him even more
pointedly than Bao-chai.
Dai-yu, seeing how morose Bao-yu looked assumed that it was because Bao-chai was
offended with him and, feeling resent?ful that he should care, at once became as
morose as he was.
Xi-feng, having been told all about Bao-yu and Golden the night before by Lady Wang,
could scarcely be her usual laughing and joking self when she knew of her aunt’s
displeasure and, taking her cue from the latter, was if anything even more glacial
than the others.
And Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun, seeing everyone else so uncomfortable, soon
began to feel just as uncomfort?able themselves.
The result was that after sitting for only a very short time, the party broke up.
Dai-yu had a natural aversion to gatherings, which she rationalized by saying that
since the inevitable consequence of getting together was parting, and since parting
made people feel lonely and feeling lonely made them unhappy, ergo it was better
for them not to get together in the first place. In the same way she argued that since
the flowers, which give us so much pleasure when they open, only cause us a lot of
extra sadness when they die, it would be better if they didn’t come out at all.
Bao-yu was just the opposite. He always wanted the party to go on for ever and
flowers to be in perpetual bloom; and when at last the party did end and the flowers
did wither well, it was infinitely sad and distressing, but it couldn’t be helped.
And so today, while everyone else left the party with feel?ings of gloom, Dai-yu alone
was completely unaffected. Bao-?yu, on the other hand, returned to his room in a
mood of black despondency, sighing and muttering as he went.
Unfortunately it was the sharp-tongued Skybright who came forward to help him
change his clothes. With provok?ing carelessness she dropped a fan while she was
doing so and snapped the bone fan-sticks by accidentally treading on it.
‘Clumsy!’ said Bao-yu reproachfully. ‘You won’t be so careless with things when you
have a household of your own.’
Skybright gave a sardonic sniff.
‘You’re getting quite a temper lately, Master Bao. Almost every time we move
nowadays we get a nasty look from you. Yesterday even Aroma caught it. Today
you’re finding fault with me, so I suppose I can expect a few kicks too. Well, kick away.
But I must say, I shouldn’t have thought treading on a fan was such a very terrible
thing to do. In the past any num?ber of glass bowls and agate cups have got broken
without your turning a hair. Why this fuss about a fan, then? If you’re not satisfied
with my service, you ought to dismiss me and get someone better. Easy come, easy
go. No need for beating about the bush.’
By the time she had finished, Bao-yu was so angry that he was shaking all over.
‘You’ll go soon enough, don’t you worry!’ he said.
Aroma had heard all this from the adjoining room and now came hurrying in.
‘Now what’s all this about?’ she said, addressing herself to Bao-yu. ‘Didn’t I tell you?
As soon as I turn my back there’s trouble.’
‘If you knew that already,’ said Skybright, ‘it’s a pity you couldn’t have come in a bit
sooner and saved me from provok?ing him. Of course, we all know that you’re the
only one who knows how to serve him properly. None of the rest of us knows how
it’s done. I suppose it’s because you serve him so well that he gave you a kick in the
ribs yesterday. Heaven knows what he’s got in store for me for having served him so
badly!’
Angry, and at the same time ashamed, Aroma was about to retort; but the sight of
Bao-yu’s face, now white with anger, made her restrain herself.
‘Be a good girl - just go away and play for a bit. It’s we who are in the wrong.’
Skybright naturally assumed that ‘we’ meant Aroma and Bao-yu. Her jealousy was
further inflamed.
‘What do you mean, “we”?’ she said, ‘You two make me feel ashamed for you, you
really do — because you needn’t think you deceive me. I know what goes on
between you when you think no one is looking. But when all’s said and done, in
actual fact, when you come down to it, you’re not even a “Miss” by rights. By rights
you’re no better than any of the rest of us. I don’t know where you get this “we”
from.’
Aroma blushed and blushed with shame, until her face had become a dusky red
colour. Too late she realized her slip. By ‘we’ she had meant no more than ‘you and I’;
not ‘Bao-yu and I’ as Skybright imagined. But the pronoun had invited
misunderstanding.
It was Bao-yu who retorted, however.
‘I’ll make her a “Miss” then; I’ll make her my chamber-?wife tomorrow, if that’s all
that’s worrying you. You can spare your jealousy on that account.’
Aroma seized his hand impulsively.
‘Don’t argue with her, she’s only a silly girl. In any case, you’ve put up with much
worse than this in the past; why be so touchy today?’
Skybright gave a harsh little laugh.
‘Oh, yes. I’m too stupid to talk to. I’m only a slave.’
‘Are you arguing with me, Miss, or with Master Bao?’ said Aroma. ‘If it’s me you’ve
got it in for, you’d better address your remarks to me elsewhere. There’s no cause to
go quarrel?ling with me in front of Master Bao. But if it’s Master Bao you want to
quarrel with, then at least you might do it a bit more quietly and not let everyone
else know about it. When I came in just now, it was for everyone’s sake, so that we
could have a bit of peace and quiet. I don’t know why you had to turn on me and
start picking on my shortcomings. It seems as if you can’t make up your mind
whether you’re angry with me or with Master Bao. Slipping in a dig here and a dig
there. I don’t know what you think you’re up to. Anyway, I shan’t say any more; I’ll
just leave you here to get on with it.’
She walked out.
‘There’s no need for you to be so angry,’ Bao-yu said to Skybright. ‘I can guess what
it is that’s bothering you. I shall go and tell Her Ladyship that you’re old enough to
leave us now and ask her to send you away. That’s what you really want, isn’t it?’


‘I don’t want to go away. Why should I want to go away?’ said Skybright with tears
in her eyes now more upset than ever, ‘You’re inventing this as a means of getting rid
of me, aren’t you, because I’m in your way? But you won’t get away with it.’
‘Look, I’ve never had to put up with scenes like this before,’ said Bao-yu. ‘What
other reason can there be but that you want to leave? I really think I had better go
and see Her Ladyship about this.’
He got up and began to go; but Aroma came in again and barred his way.
‘Where are you off to?’ she asked him smilingly.
‘To see Her Ladyship.’
‘Oh, that’s silly,’ said Aroma. ‘I wonder you’re not ashamed to. Even if Skybright
really does want to leave, there will be plenty of time to tell Her Ladyship about it
when everyone has cooled down a bit and you are feeling calm and collected. If you
go rushing off in your present state, Her Ladyship will suspect something.’
‘Her Ladyship won’t suspect anything,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I shall tell her quite openly that
Skybright has been agitating to leave.’
‘When have I ever agitated to leave?’ said Skybright, weeping now in earnest. ‘Even
if you’re angry with me, you ought not to twist things round in order to get the better
of me. But you go and tell her! I don’t care if I have to beat my own brains out, I’m
not going out of that door.’
‘Now that’s really strange,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You don’t want to go, yet at the same time
you won’t keep quiet. It’s no good; I really can’t stand this quarrelling. I shall really
have to see Her Ladyship about this and get it over with.’
This time he seemed quite determined to go.
Seeing that she was unable to hold him back, Aroma went down on her knees.
Emerald, Ripple, Musk and the other maids, aware that a quarrel of more than usual
magnitude was going on inside, were waiting together outside in breathless silence.
When word reached them that Aroma was now on her knees interceding for
Skybright, they came silently troop?ing in to kneel down behind her. Bao-yu raised
Aroma to her feet, sighed, sat down on the edge of the bed, and told the other maids
to get up.
‘What do you want me to do?’ be asked Aroma. ‘My heart is destroyed inside me,
but none of you knows or cares.’
Tears started from his eyes and rolled down his cheeks un?heeded. Seeing his tears,
Aroma too began to cry. Skybright, who stood crying beside them, was about to say
something; but just at that moment Dai-yu walked in and she slipped outside.
Dai-yu beamed at the weeping pair:
‘Crying on a holiday? What’s all this about? Have you been quarrelling over the
rice-cakes?’
Bao-yu and Aroma both burst out laughing.
‘Well, if Cousin Bao won’t tell me,’ she went on, ‘I’m sure that you will. Come!’ she
said, slapping Aroma familiarly on the shoulder. ‘Tell sis all about it. It’s obvious that
the two of you have been having an argument. Tell me what it’s all about and I’ll
make it up between you.’
‘Oh, Miss!’ Aroma gave her a push. ‘Don’t carry on so! I’m only a maid; you
shouldn’t say such things to me.’
‘Only a maid?’ said Dai-yu. I always think of you as my sister-in-law.’
‘Don’t you see that you’re simply encouraging people to be nasty to her?’ Bao-yu
protested. ‘Even as it is, people already gossip about her. How can she stand up to
them if you come along and lend your weight to what they are saying?’
‘You don’t know what I feel, Miss,’ said Aroma. ‘If I only knew how to stop
breathing, I’d gladly die.’
Dai-yu smiled.
‘If you were to die, I don’t know about anyone else, but I know that I should die of
grief.’
‘I should become a monk,’ said Bao-yu.
‘Try to be a bit more serious,’ said Aroma. ‘You and Miss Lin are both laughing at
me.’
Dai-yu held up two fingers and looked at Bao-yu with a quizzical expression.
‘That’s twice you’re going to become a monk. From now on I’m keeping the score.’
Bao-yu recognized the allusion to what he had said to her the day before. Fortunately
he was able to pass it off with a laugh. Shortly after that, Dai-yu left them.
No sooner had Dai-yu gone than someone arrived with an invitation from Xue Pan.
Bao-yu thought that this time he had better go. It turned out to be only a
drinking-party, but Xue Pan refused to release him and kept him there until it was
over. He returned home in the evening more than a little drunk.
As he came lurching into his courtyard, he saw that some?one in quest of coolness
had taken a bed outside and was lying down on it asleep. Assuming that it must be
Aroma, he sat down on the edge of it and gave her a push.
‘Is the pain any better?’
‘Can’t you leave me alone?’ she said, rising up wrathfully. He looked again and saw
that it was not Aroma after all but Skybright. Taking her by the hand, he drew her
down on the bed beside him.
‘You’re getting so self-willed,’ he said laughingly. ‘When you trod on that fan this
morning, I only made a harmless little remark, but look how you flew up in the air
about it! And then when Aroma, out of the kindness of her heart, tried to reason
with you, look how you pitched into her! Seriously, now, don’t you think it was all a
bit uncalled-for?’
‘I’m so hot,’ said Skybright. ‘Do you have to maul me about like this? Suppose
someone were to see us? Anyway, it’s not right for me to be sitting here.’
‘If you know it’s not right to be sitting here,’ he said teasingly, ‘what were you doing
lying down?’
‘Che-e-e!’ Unable at once to reply, she gave a little laugh. Then she said:
‘When you are not here it doesn’t matter. It’s your being here that makes it wrong.
Anyway, let me get up now, because I want to have a bath. Aroma and Musk have
had theirs al?ready. I’ll send them out to you.’
‘I’ve just had rather a lot to drink and I could do with a bath myself,’ said Bao-yu. ‘As
you haven’t had yours yet, bring the water out here and we’ll have a bath together.’
Skybright laughed and declined with a vigorous gesture of her hand.
‘Oh no! I daren’t start you off on that caper. I still remember that time you got
Emerald to help you bath. You must have been two or three hours in there, so that
we began to get quite worried. We didn’t like to go in while you were there, but
when we did go in to have a look afterwards, we found water all over the floor, pools
of water round the legs of the bed, and even the mat on the bed had water splashed
all over it. Heaven only knows what you’d been up to. We laughed about it for days
afterwards. I haven’t got time to fetch that amount of water. And in any case, you
don’t want to go taking baths with me. As a matter of fact it’s cooler now, so I don’t
think I shall have a bath after all. Why don’t you let me fetch you a bowl of water so
that you can have a nice wash and comb your hair? Faithful just sent a lot of fruit
round and we’ve got it soaking in iced water in the big glass bowl. I’ll tell them to
bring some out to you, shall I?’
‘All right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If you’re not having a bath yourself, I’ll just wash my hands;
and you can get me some of that fruit to eat.’
Skybright smiled.
‘You’ve already told me once today how clumsy I am. I can’t even drop a fan
without treading on it. So I’m much too clumsy to get your fruit for you. Suppose I
were to break a plate. That would be terrible!’
‘If you want to break it, by all means break it,’ said Bao-yu. ‘These things are there
for our use. What we use them for is a matter of individual taste. For example, fans
are made for fanning with; but if you prefer to tear them up because it gives you
pleasure, there’s no reason why you shouldn’t. What you mustn’t do is to use them
as objects to vent your anger on. It’s the same with plates and cups. Plates and cups
are made to put food and drink in. But if you want to smash them on purpose
because you like the noise, it’s perfectly all right to do so. As long as you don’t get
into a passion and start taking it out on things — that is the golden rule.’
‘All right then,’ said Skybright with a mischievous smile. ‘Give me your fan to tear. I
love the sound of a fan being torn.’
Bao-yu held it out to her. She took it eagerly and — chah! — promptly tore it in half.
And again — chah! chah! chah!—she tore it several more times. Bao-yu, an
appreciative onlooker, laughed and encouraged her.
‘Well torn! Well torn! Now again - a really loud one!’
Just then Musk appeared. She stared at them indignantly.
‘Don’t do that!’ she said. ‘It’s wicked to waste things like that.’
But Bao-yu leaped up to her, snatched the fan from her hand, and passed it to
Skybright, who at once tore it into several pieces. The two of them, Bao-yu and
Skybright, then burst into uproarious laughter.
‘What do you think you’re doing?’ said Musk. ‘That’s my fan you’ve just ruined.’
‘What’s an old fan?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Open up the fan box and get yourself another.’
‘If that’s your attitude,’ said Musk, ‘we might as well carry out the whole boxful and
let her tear away to her heart’s con?tent.’
‘All right. Go and get it,’ said Bao-yu.
‘And be born a beggar in my next life?’ said Musk. ‘No thank you I She hasn’t
broken her arm. Let her go and get it herself.’
Skybright stretched back on the bed, smiling complacently. ‘I’m rather tired just now.
I think I shall tear some more tomorrow.’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘The ancients used to say that for one smile of a beautiful woman a thousand taels
are well spent. For a few old fans it’s cheap at the price!’
He called to Aroma, who had just finished changing into clean clothes, to come
outside and join them. Little Melilot came and cleared away the broken bits of fan,
and everyone sat for a while and enjoyed the cool.
But our narrative supplies no further details of that evening.

*

About noon next day, while Lady Wang, Bao-chai, Dai-yu and the girls were sitting in
Grandmother Jia’s room, some?one came in to announce that ‘Miss Shi’ had arrived.
Shortly afterwards Shi Xiang-yun appeared in the courtyard, attended by a bevy of
matrons and maids. Bao-chai, Dai-yu and the rest hurried out to the foot of the steps
to welcome her.
For young girls like the cousins a reunion after a mere month’s separation is an
occasion for touching demonstrations of affection. After these initial transports,
when they were all indoors and the greetings, introductions and salutations had
been completed, Grandmother Jia suggested that, as the weather was so hot,
Xiang-yun should remove her outer gar?ments. Xiang-yun rose to her feet with
alacrity and divested herself of one or two layers. Lady Wang was amused.
‘Gracious, child! What a lot you have on! I don’t think I’ve ever seen anyone
wearing so much.’
‘It’s my Aunt Shi who makes me wear it all,’ said Xiang yun. ‘You wouldn’t catch me
wearing this stuff if I didn’t have to.’
‘You don’t know our Xiang-yun, Aunt,’ Bao-chai inter?posed. ‘She’s really happiest
in boy’s clothes. That time she was here in the third or fourth month last year, I
remember one day she dressed up in one of Bao-yu’s gowns and put a pair of his
boots on and one of his belts round her waist. At first glance she looked exactly like
Cousin Bao. It was only the ear-rings that gave her away. When she stood behind that
chair over there, Grandmother was completely taken in. She said, “Bao-yu, come
over here! You’ll get the dust from that hanging lamp in your eyes if you’re not
careful.” But Xiang?-yun just smiled and didn’t move. It was only when everyone
couldn’t hold it in any longer and started laughing that Grandmother realized who it
was and joined in the laugh. She told her that she made a very good-looking boy.’
‘That’s nothing,’ said Dai-yu. ‘What about that time last year when she came to stay
for a couple of days with us in the first month and it snowed? Grandma and Auntie
Wang had just got back from somewhere — I think it was from visiting the ancestors’
portraits — and she saw Grandma’s new scarlet felt rain-cape lying there and put it
on when no one was looking. Of course, it was much too big and much too long for
her, so she hitched it up and tied it round her waist with a sash and went out like that
into the back courtyard to help the maids build a snowman. And then she slipped
over in it and got covered all over with mud—’
The others all laughed at the recollection.
Bao-chai asked Xiang-yun’s nurse, Mrs Zhou, whether Xiang-yun was still as
tomboyish as ever. Nurse Zhou laughed but said nothing.
‘I don’t mind her being tomboyish,’ said Ying-chun, ‘but I do wish she wasn’t such a
chatterbox. You wouldn’t believe it — even when she’s in bed at night it still goes on.
Jabber-jabber, jabber-jabber. Then she laughs. Then she talks a bit more. Then she
laughs again. And you never heard such a lot of rubbish in your life, I don’t know
where she gets it all from.’
‘Well, perhaps she’ll have got over that by now,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I hear that
someone was round the other day to talk about a betrothal. Now that there’s a
future mother-in-law to think about, she can’t be quite as tomboyish as she used to
be.’
‘Are you staying this time, or do you have to go back to?night?’ asked Grandmother
Jia.
‘Your Old Ladyship hasn’t seen all the clothes she’s brought,’ said Nurse Zhou.
‘She’ll be staying two days here at the very least.’
‘Isn’t Bao at home?’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Listen to her!’ said Bao-chai. ‘Cousin Bao is the only one she thinks about. He and
she get on well together because they are both fond of mischief. You can see she
hasn’t really changed.’
‘Perhaps now that you’re getting older you had better stop using baby-names,’ said
Grandmother Jia, reminded by the talk of betrothal that her babies were rapidly
turning into grown-ups.
Just then Bao-yu came in.
‘Ah! Hallo, Yun! Why didn’t you come when we sent for you the other day?’
‘Grandmother has just this moment been saying that it is time you all stopped
using baby-names,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I must say, this isn’t a very good beginning.’
‘Our cousin has got something nice to give you,’ said Dai?-yu to Xiang-yun.
‘Oh? What is it?’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Don’t believe her,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Goodness! It’s no time since you were here last,
but you seem to have grown taller already.’
Xiang-yun laughed.
‘How’s Aroma?’
‘She’s fine. Thank you for asking.’
‘I’ve brought something for her,’ said Xiang-yun. She produced a knotted-up silk
handkerchief.
‘What treasure have you got wrapped up in there?’ said Bao-yu. ‘The best present
you could have brought Aroma would have been a couple of those cheap agate rings
like the ones you sent us the other day.’
‘What are these, then?’
With a triumphant smile she opened her little bundle and revealed four rings, each
inset with the veined red agate they had so much admired on a previous occasion.
‘What a girl!’ said Dai-yu. ‘These are exactly the same as the ones you sent us the
other day by messenger. Why didn’t you get him to bring these too and save yourself
some trouble? I thought you must have got some wonderful rarity tied up in that
handkerchief, seeing that you’d gone to all the trouble of bringing it here yourself —
and all the time it was only a few more of those! You really are rather a silly.’
‘Thilly yourthelf!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘The others can decide which of us is the silly one
when I have explained my reason. If I send things for you and the girls, it’s assumed
that they are for you without the messenger even needing to say any?thing; but if I
send things for any of the maids, I have to explain very carefully to the messenger
which ones I mean. Now if the messenger is someone intelligent, that’s all right; but
if it’s someone not so bright who has difficulty in remembering names, they’ll
probably make such a mess of it that they’ll get not only the maids’ presents mixed
up, but yours as well. Then again, if the messenger is a woman, it’s not so bad; but
the other day it was one of the boys - and you know how hopeless they are over girls’
names. So you see, I thought it would be simpler if I delivered the maids’ ones myself.
There!’— she laid the rings down one after another on the table — ‘One for Aroma;
one for Faithful; one for Golden; and one for Patience. Can you imagine one of the
boys getting those four names right?’
The others laughed.
‘Clever! Clever!’ they said.
‘You’re always so eloquent,’ said Bao-yu. ‘No one else gets a chance.’
‘If she weren’t so eloquent, she wouldn’t be worthy of the gold kylin,’ said Dai-yu
huffily, rising from her seat and walk?ing off as she spoke.
Fortunately no one heard her but Ban-chai, who made a laughing grimace, and
Bao-yu, who immediately regretted having once more spoken out of turn, but who,
suddenly catching sight of Bao-chai’s expression, could not help laugh?ing himself.
Seeing him laugh, Bao-chai at once rose from her seat and hurried off to joke with
Dai-yu.
‘When you’ve finished your tea and rested a bit,’ said Grandmother Jia to Xiang-yun,
‘you can go and see your married cousins. After that, you can amuse yourself in the
Garden with the girls. It’s nice and cool there.’
Xiang-yun thanked her grandmother. She wrapped up three of the rings again, and
after sitting a little longer, went off, attended by her nannies and maids, to call on
Wang Xi-?feng. After chatting a while with her, she went into the Gar?den and called
on Li Wan. Then, after sitting a short while with Li Wan, she went off in the direction
of Green Delights in quest of Aroma. Before doing so, however, she turned to
dis?miss her escort.
‘You needn’t stay with me any longer,’ she said. ‘You can go off now and visit your
relations. I’ll just keep Fishy to wait on me.
The others thanked her and went off to look for various kith and kin, leaving
Xiang-yun alone with Kingfisher.
‘Why aren’t these water-lilies out yet?’ said Kingfisher.
‘It isn’t time for them yet,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Look, they’re going to be “double-decker” ones, like the ones in our lily-pond at
home,’ said Kingfisher.
‘Our ones are better,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘They’ve got a pomegranate-tree here which has four or five lots of flowers growing
one above the other on each branch,’ said Kingfisher. ‘That’s a
double-double-double?-decker. I wonder what makes them grow like that.’
‘Plants are the same as people,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘The healthier their constitution is,
the better they grow.’
‘I don’t believe that,’ said Kingfisher with a toss of her head. ‘If that were so, why
don’t we see people walking around with one head growing on top of the other?’
Xiang-yun was unable to avoid laughing at the girl’s sim?plicity.
‘I’ve told you before, you talk too much,’ she said. ‘Let’s see: how can one answer a
question like that? Everything in the world is moulded by the forces of Yin and Yang.
That means that, besides the normal, the abnormal, the peculiar, the freakish — in
fact all the thousands and thousands of different variations we find in things — are
caused by different combina?tions of Yin and Yang. Even if something appears that is
so rare that no one has ever seen it before, the principle is still the same.’
‘So according to what you say,’ said Kingfisher, ‘all the things that have ever existed,
from the time the world began right up to the present moment, have just been a lot
of Yins and Yangs.’
‘No, stupid!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘The more you say, the sil?lier you get. “Just a lot of
Yins and Yangs” indeed! In any case, strictly speaking Yin and Yang are not two things
but one and the same thing. By the time the Yang has become exhausted, it is Yin;
and by the time the Yin has become exhausted, it is Yang. It isn’t a case of one of
them coming to an end and then the other one growing out of nothing.’
‘That’s too deep for me,’ said Kingfisher. ‘What sort of thing is a Yin-yang, I’d like to
know? No one’s ever seen one. You just answer that, Miss. What does a Yin-yang look
like?’
‘Yin-yang is a sort of force,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘It’s the force in things that gives them
their distinctive forms. For example, the sky is Yang and the earth is Yin; water is Yin
and fire is Yang; the sun is Yang and the moon is Yin.’
‘Ah yes! Now I understand,’ said Kingfisher happily. ‘That’s why astrologers call the
sun the “Yang star” and the moon the “Yin star”.’
‘Holy Name!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘She understands.’
‘That’s not so difficult,’ said Kingfisher. ‘But what about things like mosquitoes and
fleas and midges and plants and flowers and bricks and tiles? Surely you are not
going to say that they are all Yin-yang too?’
‘Certainly they are!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Take the leaf of a tree, for example. That’s
divided into Yin and Yang. The side facing upwards towards the sky is Yang; the
underside, facing towards the ground, is Yin.’
Kingfisher nodded.
‘I see. Yes. I can understand that. But take these fans we are holding. Surely they
don’t have Yin and Yang?’
‘Yes they do. The front of the fan is Yang; the back of the fan is Yin.’
Kingfisher nodded, satisfied. She tried to think of some other object to ask about, but
being for the moment unable to, she began looking around her for inspiration. As she
did so, her eye chanced to light on the gold kylin fastened in the intricate loopings of
her mistress’s girdle.
‘Well, Miss,’ she said, pointing triumphantly to the kylin, you’re not going to say
that that’s got Yin and Yang?
‘Certainly. In the case of birds and beasts the males are Yang and the females are
Yin.’
‘Is this a daddy one or a mummy one?’ said Kingfisher.
‘“A daddy one or a mummy one”! Silly girl!’
‘All right, then,’ said Kingfisher. ‘But why is it that everything else has Yin and Yang
but we haven’t?’
‘Get along with you, naughty girl! What subject will you get on to next?’
‘Why? Why can’t you tell me?’ said Kingfisher. ‘Anyway, I know; so there’s no need
for you to be so nasty to me.’
Xiang-yun suppressed a giggle.
‘You’re Yang and I’m Yin,’ said Kingfisher.
Xiang-yun held her handkerchief to her mouth and laughed ‘Well, that’s right, isn’t
it?’ said Kingfisher. ‘What are you laughing at?’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘That’s quite right.’
‘That’s what they always say,’ said Kingfisher: ‘the master is Yang and the servant is
Yin. Even I can understand that principle.’
‘I’m sure you can,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Very good.’
While they were talking, a glittering golden object at the foot of the rose pergola
caught Xiang-yun’s eye. She pointed it out to Kingfisher.
‘Go and see what it is,’
Kingfisher bounded over and picked it up.
‘Ah ha!’ she said, examining the object in her hand. ‘Now we shall be able to see
whether it’s Yin or Yang.’
She took hold of the kylin fastened to Xiang-yun’s girdle and held it up to look at it
more closely. Xiang-yun wanted to see what it was that she held in her hand, but
Kingfisher wouldn’t let her.
‘It’s my treasure,’ she said with a laugh. ‘I won’t let you see it, Miss. Funny, though.
I wonder where it came from. I’ve never seen anyone here wearing it.’
‘Come on! Let me look,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘There you are, Miss!’ Kingfisher opened her hand.
Xiang-yun looked. It was a beautiful, shining gold kylin, both larger and more ornate
than the one she was wearing. Reach?ing out and taking it from Kingfisher, she held
it on the palm of her hand and contemplated it for some moments in silence.
Whatever reverie the contemplation inspired was broken by the sudden arrival of
Bao-yu.
‘What are you doing, standing out here in the blazing sun?’ he asked her. ‘Why
don’t you go and see Aroma?’
‘We were on our way,’ said Xiang-yun, hurriedly conceal?ing the gold kylin.
The three of them entered the courtyard of Green Delights together.
Aroma had gone outside to take the air and was leaning on the verandah railings at
the foot of the front door steps. As soon as she caught sight of Xiang-yun, she hurried
down into the courtyard to welcome her, and taking her by the hand, led her into the
house, animatedly exchanging news with her as they went.
‘You should have come sooner,’ said Bao-yu when they were indoors and Aroma
had made Xiang-yun take a seat. ‘I’ve got something nice for you here and I’ve been
waiting for you to come so that I could give it to you.’
He had been hunting through his pockets as he said this. Not finding what he was
searching for, he exclaimed in sur?prise.
‘Aiyo!’ He turned to Aroma. ‘Have you put it away some?where?’
‘Put what away?’
‘That little kylin I got the other day.’
‘You’ve been carrying it around with you everywhere,’ said Aroma. ‘Why ask me
about it?’
Bao-yu clapped his hands together in vexation.
‘Oh, I’ve lost it! Wherever am I going to look for it?’
He got up to begin searching.
Xiang-yun now realized that it must have been Bao-yu who dropped the kylin she had
only a few minutes earlier dis?covered outside.
‘Since when have you had a kylin?’ she asked him. ‘Oh, several days now,’ said
Bao-yu. ‘What a shame! I’ll never get another one like that. And the trouble is, I don’t
know when I can have lost it. Oh dear! How stupid of me!’
‘It’s only an ornament you’re getting so upset about,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘What a good
job it wasn’t something more serious!’
She opened her hand:
‘Look! Is that it?’
Bao-yu looked and saw, with extravagant delight, that it was.
The remainder of this episode will be told in the following chapter.




CHAPTER 32
Bao-yu demonstrates confusion of mind by making his
declaration to the wrong person
And Golden shows an unconquerable spirit by ending her
humiliation in death

OUR last chapter told of Bao-yu’s delight at seeing the gold kylin again. He reached
out eagerly and took it from Xiang-?yun’s hand.
‘Fancy your finding it!’ he said. ‘How did you come to pick it up?’
‘It’s a good job it was only this you lost,’ she said. ‘One of these days it will be your
seal of office — and then it won’t be quite so funny.’
‘Oh, losing one’s seal of office is nothing,’ said Bao-yu. Losing a thing like this is
much more serious.’
Aroma meanwhile was pouring tea.
‘I heard your good news the other day,’ she said, handing Xiang-yun a cup.
‘Congratulations!’
Xiang-yun bent low over the cup to hide her blushes and made no reply.
‘Why so bashful, Miss?’ said Aroma. ‘Have you forgotten the things you used to tell
me at night all those years ago, when we used to sleep together in the little
closet-bed at Her Old Ladyship’s? You weren’t very bashful then. What makes you so
bashful with me now, all of a sudden?’
Xiang-yun’s face became even redder. She gave a forced little laugh.
‘Who’s talking? That was a time when you and I were very close to each other.
Then I had to go back home when my uncle’s first wife died and you were given
Cousin Bao to look after, and I don’t know why, but whenever I came back here after
that, you seemed somehow changed towards me.’
It was now Aroma’s turn to blush and protest.
‘When you first came to live here it was “Pearl dear this” and “Pearl dear that” all
the time. You were always coaxing me to do things for you — do your hair, wash your
face, or I don’t know what. But now that’s all changed. Now you’re the young lady,
aren’t you? You can’t act the young lady with me and expect me to stay on the same
familiar terms as before.’
‘Holy Name!’ said Xiang-yun, now genuinely indignant. ‘That’s tho unfair. I wish I
may die if I ever “acted the young lady” with you, as you put it. I come here in this
frightful heat, and the very first person I want to see when I get here is you. Ask Fishy
if you don’t believe me. She can tell you. At home I’m always going on about you.’
Aroma and Bao-yu both laughed.
‘Don’t take it to heart so, it was only a joke. You shouldn’t be so excitable.’
‘Don’t, whatever you do, admit that what you said was wounding,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Say I’m “excitable” and put me in the wrong!’
While she said this, she was undoing the knotted silk hand-kerchief and extracting
one of the three rings from it. She handed it to Aroma. Aroma was greatly touched.
‘I’ve got one like this already,’ she said. ‘It was given to me when you sent those
ones the other day to the young ladies. But fancy your bringing this one here
specially! Now I know you haven’t forgotten me. It’s little things like this that show
you what a person really is. The ring itself isn’t worth much, I know. It’s the thought
behind it.’
‘Who gave you the one you’ve already got?’ said Xiang-?yun.
‘Miss Bao,’ said Aroma.
‘Ah,’ said Xiang-yun, ‘Miss Bao. And I was thinking it must have been Miss Lin.
Often when I’m at home I think to myself that of all my cousins Bao-chai is the one I
like best. It’s a pity we couldn’t have been born of the same mother. With her for an
elder sister it wouldn’t matter so much being an orphan.’
Her eyelids reddened as she said this and she seemed to be on the verge of tears.
‘Now, now, now!’ said Bao-yu. ‘Don’t say things like that.’
‘And why not?’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Oh, I know your trouble. You’re afraid that Cousin
Lin might hear and get angry with me again for praising Cousin Bao. That’s what’s
worrying you, isn’t it?’
Aroma giggled.
‘Oh Miss Yun! You’re just as outspoken as you used to be.’
‘Well, I’ve said that you lot are difficult to talk to,’ said Bao-yu, ‘and I was certainly
right!’
‘Don’t make me sick,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘You say what you like to us. It’s with your
Cousin Lin that you have to be so careful.’
‘Never mind about that,’ said Aroma. ‘Joking apart, now: I want to ask you a favour.’
‘What is it?’ said Xiang-yun.
‘I’ve got a pair of slipper-tops here that I’ve already cut the openwork pattern in,
but as I haven’t been very well this last day or two, I haven’t been able to sew them
on to the backing material. Do you think you’d have time to do them for me?’
‘That’s rather a strange request,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Quite apart from all the clever
maids this household employs you have your own full-time tailors and embroiderers.
Why ask me to do your sewing? You could give it to anyone here you liked. They
could hardly refuse you.’
‘You can’t be serious,’ said Aroma. ‘None of the sewing in this room is allowed to go
outside. Surely you knew that?’
Xiang-yun inferred from this that the slippers in question were for Bao-yu.
‘Oh well,’ she said, ‘in that case I suppose I’d better do them for you. On one
condition, though: I’ll do them if they are for you to wear, but if they are for anyone
else, I’m afraid I can’t.’
‘Get along with you!’ said Aroma. ‘Ask you to make slippers for me? I wouldn’t have
the nerve. No, I’ll be honest with you, they’re not for me. Never mind who they’re for.
Just tell yourself that I’m the one you’ll be doing the favour.’
‘It isn’t that,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘In the past I’ve done lots of things for you. Surely you
must know what makes me un?willing now?’
‘I’m sorry, I don’t,’ said Aroma.
‘What about the person who got in a temper the other day when that fan-case I
made for you was compared with hers and cut it up with a pair of scissors? I heard all
about that, so don’t start protesting. If you expect me to do sewing for you after that,
you’re just treating me as your drudge.’
‘I didn’t know at the time it was you who made it,’ Bao-yu put in hurriedly.
‘He really didn’t,’ said Aroma. ‘I pretended there was some?one outside we’d just
discovered who could do very fine and original needlework. I told him I’d got them to
do that fan?-case for him as a sample. He believed what I said and went around
showing it to everyone. Unfortunately while he was doing this he upset you know
who and she took a pair of scissors and cut it in pieces. Afterwards he was very
anxious to have some more work done by the same person, so I had to tell him who
it really was. He was very upset when he heard that it was you.’
‘I still think this is a very strange request,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘If Miss Lin can cut things
up, she can sew them for him, too. Why not ask her to do them for you?’
‘Oh, she wouldn’t want to do them,’ said Aroma. ‘And even if she did, Her Old
Ladyship wouldn’t let her, for fear of her tiring herself. The doctors say she needs rest
and quiet. I wouldn’t want to trouble her with them. Last year she took practically
the whole year embroidering one little purse, and this last six months I don’t think
she’s picked up a needle.’
Their conversation was interrupted by a servant with a message:
‘Mr Jia of Rich Street is here. The Master says will Master Bao receive him, please?’
Recognizing the ‘Mr Jia’ of the message as Jia Yu-cun, Bao-yu was more than a little
vexed. While Aroma hurried off for his going-out clothes, he sat pulling his boots on
and grumbling.
‘He’s got Father to talk to, surely that’s enough for him? Why does he always have
to see me?’
Xiang-yun laughed at his disgruntlement:
‘I’m sure you’re very good at entertaining people,’ she said. ‘That’s why Sir Zheng
asks you to see him.’
‘That message didn’t come from Father,’ said Bao-yu. ‘He’ll have made it up
himself.’
‘“When the host is refined, the callers are frequent,”’ said Xiang-yun. ‘There must
be something about you that has impressed him, otherwise he wouldn’t want to see
you.’
‘I make no claim to being refined, thanks all the same,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m as common
as dirt. And furthermore I have no wish to mix with people of his sort.’
‘You’re incorrigible,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Now that you’re older, you ought to be mixing
with these officials and ad?ministrators as much as you can. Even if you don’t want to
take the Civil Service examinations and become an adminis?trator yourself, you can
learn a lot from talking to these people about the way the Empire is governed and
the people who govern it that will stand you in good stead later on, when you come
to manage your own affairs and take your place in society. You might even pick up
one or two decent, respect?able friends that way. You’ll certainly never get anywhere
if you spend all your time with us girls.’
Bao-yu found such talk highly displeasing.
‘I think perhaps you’d better go and sit in someone else’s room,’ he said. ‘I wouldn’t
want a decent, respectable young lady like you to get contaminated.’
‘Don’t try reasoning with him, Miss,’ Aroma put in hur?riedly. ‘Last time Miss Bao
tried it, he was just as rude to her. No consideration for her feelings whatever. He just
said “Hai!”, picked up his heels, and walked out of the room, leaving her still half-way
through her sentence. Poor Miss Bao! She was so embarrassed she turned bright red.
She didn’t know what to say. A good job it was her, though, and not Miss Lin. If it had
been Miss Lin, there’d have been weeping and carrying on and I don’t know what. I
really admire the way Miss Bao behaved on that occasion. She just stood there a
while collecting herself and then walked quietly out of the room. Myself, I was quite
upset, thinking she must be offended. But not a bit of it. Next time she came round,
it was just as if nothing had happened. A real little lady, Miss Bao — and
generous-hearted, too. And yet the funny thing is that his lordship seems to have
fallen out with her, whereas Miss Lin, who is always getting on her high horse and
ignoring him, has him running round and apologizing to her all the time.’
‘Have you ever heard Miss Lin talking that sort of stupid rubbish?’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’d
long since have fallen out with her if she did.’
Aroma and Xiang-yun shook their heads pityingly.
‘So that’s “stupid rubbish”, is it?’ they said, laughing.

*

Dai-yu rightly surmised that now Xiang-yun had arrived, Bao-yu would lose no time in
telling her about his newly? acquired kylin.
Now Dai-yu had observed that in the romances which Bao-yu smuggled in to her and
of which she was nowadays an avid consumer, it was always some trinket or small
object of clothing or jewellery a pair of lovebirds, a male and female phoenix, a jade
ring, a gold buckle, a silken handker?chief, an embroidered belt or what not — that
brought the heroes and heroines together. And since the fate and future happiness of
those fortunate beings seemed to depend wholly on the instrumentality of such
trifling objects, it was natural for her to suppose that Bao-yu’s acquisition of the gold
kylin would become the occasion of a dramatic rupture with her and the beginning of
an association with Xiang-yun in which he and Xiang-yun would do together all those
delightful things that she had read about in the romances.
It was with such apprehensions that she made her way stealthily towards Green
Delights, her intention being to observe how the two of them were behaving and
shape her own actions accordingly. Imagine her surprise when, just as she was about
to enter, she heard Xiang-yun lecturing Bao-yu on his social obligations and Bao-yu
telling Xiang-yun that ‘Cousin Lin never talked that sort of rubbish’ and that if she did
he would have ‘fallen out with her long ago’. Mingled emotions of happiness, alarm,
sorrow and regret assailed her.
Happiness:
Because after all (she thought) I wasn’t mistaken in my judgement of you. I always
thought of you as a true friend, and I was right.
Alarm:
Because if you praise me so unreservedly in front of other people, your warmth and
affection are sure, sooner or later, to excite suspicion and be misunderstood.
Regret:
Because if you are my true friend, then I am yours and the two of us are a perfect
match. But in that case why did there have to be all this talk of ‘the gold and the jade’?
Alternatively, if there had to be all this talk of gold and jade, why weren’t we the two
to have them? Why did there have to be a Bao-chai with her golden locket?
Sorrow:
Because though there are things of burning importance to be said, without a father
or a mother I have no one to say them for me. And besides, I feel so muzzy lately and
I know that my illness is gradually gaining a hold on me. (The doctors say that the
weakness and anaemia I suffer from may be the beginnings of a consumption.) So
even if I am your true love, I fear I may not be able to wait for you. And even though
you are mine, you can do nothing to alter my fate.
At that point in her reflections she began to weep; and feel?ing in no fit state to be
seen, she turned away from the door and began to make her way back again.
Bao-yu had finished his hasty dressing and now came out of the house. He saw
Dai-yu slowly walking on ahead of him and, judging by her appearance from behind,
wiping her eyes. He hurried forward to catch up with her.
‘Where are you off to, coz? Are you crying again? Who has upset you this time?’
Dai-yu turned and saw that it was Bao-yu.
‘I’m perfectly all right,’ she said, forcing a smile. ‘What would I be crying for?’
‘Look at you! The tears are still wet on your face. How can you tell such fibs?’
Impulsively he stretched out his hand to wipe them. Dai-yu recoiled several paces:
‘You’ll get your head chopped off!’ she said. ‘You really must keep your hands to
yourself.’
‘I’m sorry. My feelings got the better of me. I’m afraid I wasn’t thinking about my
head.’
‘No, I forgot,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Losing your head is nothing, is it? It’s losing your
kylin—the famous gold kylin - that is really serious!’
Her words immediately put Bao-yu in a passion. He came up to her and held his face
close to hers.
‘Do you say these things to put a curse on me? or is it merely to make me angry
that you say them ?’
Remembering their recent quarrel, Dai-yu regretted her careless reintroduction of its
theme and hastened to make amends:
‘Now don’t get excited. I shouldn’t have said that - oh come now, it really isn’t that
important! Look at you! The veins are standing out on your forehead and your face is
all covered with sweat.’
She moved forward and wiped the perspiration from his brow. For some moments he
stood there motionless, staring at her. Then he said:
‘Don’t worry!’
Hearing this, Dai-yu herself was silent for some moments.
‘Why should I worry?’ she said eventually. ‘I don’t under?stand you. Would you
mind telling me what you are talking about?’
Bao-yu sighed.
‘Do you really not understand? Can I really have been all this time mistaken in my
feelings towards you? If you don’t even know your own mind, it’s small wonder that
you’re always getting angry on my account.’
‘I really don’t understand what you mean about not worry?ing,’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-yu sighed again and shook his head.
‘My dear coz, don’t think you can fool me. If you don’t understand what I’ve just
said, then not only have feelings towards you been all along mistaken, but all that
yon have ever felt for me has been wasted, too. It’s because you worry so much that
you’ve made yourself ill. If only you could take things a bit easier, your illness
wouldn’t go on getting more and more serious all the time.’
Dai-yu was thunderstruck. He had read her mind - had seen inside her more clearly
than if she had plucked out her entrails and held them out for his inspection. And
now there were a thousand things that she wanted to tell him; yet though she was
dying to speak, she was unable to utter a single syllable and stood there like a
simpleton, gazing at him in silence.
Bao-yu, too, had a thousand things to say, but he, too, stood mutely gazing at her, not
knowing where to begin.
After the two of them had stared at each other for some considerable time in silence,
Dai-yu heaved a deep sigh. The tears gushed from her eyes and she turned and
walked away. Bao-yu hurried after her and caught at her dress.
‘Coz dear, stop a moment! Just let me say one word.’
As she wiped her eyes with one hand, Dai-yu pushed him away from her with the
other.
‘There’s nothing to say. I already know what you want to tell me.’
She said this without turning back her head, and having said it, passed swiftly on her
way. Bao-yu remained where he was standing, gazing after her in silent stupefaction.
Now Bao-yu had left the apartment in such haste that he had forgotten to take his
fan with him. Fearing that he would be very hot without it, Aroma hurried outside to
give it to him, but when she noticed him standing some way ahead of her talking to
Dai-yu, she halted. After a little while she saw Dai-yu walk away and Bao-yu continue
standing motionless where he was. She chose this moment to go up and speak to
him.
‘You’ve gone out without your fan,’ she said. ‘It’s a good job I noticed. Here you are.
I ran out to give it to you.’
Bao-yu, still in a muse, saw Aroma there talking to him, yet without clearly perceiving
who it was. With the same glazed look in his eyes, he began to speak.
‘Dearest coz! I’ve never before dared to tell you what I felt for you. Now at last I’m
going to pluck -up courage and tell you, and after that I don’t care what becomes of
me. Because of you I, too, have made myself ill — only I haven’t dared tell anyone
about it and have had to bear it all in silence. And the day that your illness is cured, I
do believe that mine, too, will get better. Night and day, coz, sleeping and dreaming,
you are never out of my mind.’
Aroma listened to this declaration aghast.
‘Holy saints preserve us!’ she exclaimed. ‘He’ll be the death of me.’
She gave him a shake.
‘What are you talking about? Are you bewitched? You’d better hurry.’
Bao-yu seemed suddenly to waken from his trance and recognized the person he had
been speaking to as Aroma. His face turned a deep red with embarrassment and he
snatched the fan from her and fled.

*

After he had gone, Aroma began thinking about the words he had just said and
realized that they must have been intended for Dai-yu. She reflected with some
alarm that if things be?tween them were as his words seemed to indicate, there was
every likelihood of an ugly scandal developing, and wondered how she could arrange
matters to prevent it. Preoccupied with these reflections, she stood as motionless
and unseeing as her master had done a few moments before. Bao-chai found her in
this state on her way back from the house.
‘What are you brooding on, out in the burning sun?’ she asked her, laughing.
Aroma laughed back.
‘There were two little sparrows here having a fight. They were so funny, I had to
stand and watch them.’
‘Where was Cousin Bao rushing off to just now, all dressed up for going out?’ said
Bao-chai. ‘I was going to call out and ask him, but he is getting so crotchety lately
that I thought I had better not.’
‘The Master sent for him,’ said Aroma.
‘Oh dear!’ said Bao-chai. ‘I wonder why he should send for him in heat like this? I
hope he hasn’t thought of something to be angry about and called him over to be
punished.’
‘No, it isn’t that,’ said Aroma. ‘I think it’s to receive a visitor.’
‘It must be a very tiresome visitor,’ said Bao-chai, ‘to go around bothering people
on a boiling day like this instead of staying at home and trying to keep cool.’
‘You can say that again!’ said Aroma.
‘What’s young Xiang-yun been doing at your place?’ said Bao-chai, changing the
subject.
‘We were having a chat,’ said Aroma, ‘and after that she had a look at some
slipper-tops that I’ve got ready pasted and have asked her to sew for me.’
‘You’re an intelligent young woman,’ said Bao-chai, having first looked to right and
left of her to make sure that no one else was about, ‘I should have thought you’d
have sense enough to leave her a few moments in peace. I’ve been watch?ing our
Yun lately, and from what I’ve observed of her and various stray remarks I’ve heard, I
get the impression that back at home she can barely call her soul her own. I know for
a fact that they are too mean to pay for professional seam?stresses and that nearly
all the sewing has to be done by the women of the household, and I’m pretty sure
that’s why, whenever she’s found herself alone with me on these last few visits, she’s
told me how tired she gets at home. When I press her for details, her eyes fill with
tears and she answers evasively, as though she’d like to tell me but daren’t. It must
be very hard for her, losing both her parents when she was so young. It quite wrings
my heart to see her so exploited.’
Aroma smote her hands together as understanding dawned.
‘Yes, I see. I see now why she was so slow with those ten butterfly bows I asked her
to sew for me last month. It was ages before she sent them, and even then there was
a message to say that she’d only been able to do them roughly. She told me I’d better
use them on something else. “If you want nice, even ones,” she said, “you’ll have to
wait until next time I come to stay with you.” Now I can see why. She didn’t like to
refuse when I asked her, but I suppose she had to sit up till midnight doing them,
poor thing. Oh, how stupid of me! I’d never have asked her if I’d realized.’
‘Last time she was here, she told me that it’s quite normal for her to sit up sewing
until midnight,’ said Bao-chai; ‘and if her aunt or the other women catch her doing
the slightest bit of work for anyone else, they are angry with her.’
‘It’s all the fault of that pig-headed young master of mine,’ said Aroma. ‘He refuses
to let any of his sewing be done by the seamstresses outside. Every bit of work, large
or small, has to be done in his room and I just can’t manage it all on my own.’
Bao-chai laughed.
‘Why do you take any notice of him? Why not simply give it to the seamstresses
without telling him?’
‘He’s not so easy to fool,’ said Aroma. ‘He can tell the difference. I’m afraid there’s
nothing for it. I shall just have to work through it all gradually on my own.’
‘Now just a minute!’ said Bao-chai. ‘We’ll think of a way round this. Suppose I were
to do some of it for you?’
‘Would you really?’ said Aroma. ‘I’d be so grateful if you would. I’ll come over with
some this evening then.’
She had barely finished saying this when an old woman came rushing up to them in a
state of great agitation.
‘Isn’t it dreadful? Miss Golden has drowned herself in the well.’
‘Which Golden? said Aroma, startled.
‘Which Golden?’ said the old woman. ‘There aren’t two Goldens that I know of.
Golden from Her Ladyship’s room, of course, that was dismissed the day before
yesterday. She’d been crying and carrying on at home ever since, but nobody paid
much attention to her. Then suddenly, when they went to look for her, she wasn’t
there, and just now someone going to fetch water from the well by the south-east
corner found a body in it and rushed inside for help, and when they fished it out,
they found that it was Golden. They did all they could to revive her, but it was too
late. She was dead.’
‘How strange!’ said Bao-chai.
Aroma shook her head wonderingly and a tear or two stole down her cheek. She and
Golden had been like sisters to each other.
Bao-chai hurried off to Lady Wang’s to offer her sympathy. Aroma went back to
Green Delights.

*

When Bao-chai arrived at Lady Wang’s apartment she found the whole place hushed
and still and Lady Wang sitting in the inner room on her own, crying. Deeming it an
unsuitable moment to raise the subject of her visit, Bao-chai sat down beside her in
silence.
‘Where have you just come from?’ Lady Wang asked her.
‘The Garden.’
‘The Garden,’ Lady Wang echoed. ‘Did you by any chance see your cousin Bao-yu
there?’
‘I saw him going out just now wearing his outdoor clothes, but I don’t know where
he was going to.’
Lady Wang nodded and gave a sigh.
‘I don’t know if you’ve heard. Something very strange has happened. Golden has
drowned herself in a well.’
‘That is strange,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Why ever did she do that?’
‘The day before yesterday she broke something of mine,’ said Lady Wang, ‘and in a
moment of anger I struck her a couple of times and sent her back to her mother’s. I
had only been meaning to leave her there a day or two to punish her. After that I
would have had her back again. I never dreamed that she would be so angry with me
as to drown herself. Now that she has, I feel that it is all my fault.’
‘It’s only natural that a kind person like you should see it in that way,’ said Bao-chai,
‘but in my opinion Golden would never have drowned herself in anger. It’s much
more likely that she was playing about beside the well and slipped in accidentally.
While she was in service her movements were restricted and it would be natural for
her to go running around everywhere during her first day or two outside. There’s no
earthly reason why she should have felt angry enough with you to drown herself. If
she did, all I can say is that she was a stupid person and not worth feeling sorry for!’
Lady Wang sighed and shook her head doubtfully.
‘Well, it may be as you say, but I still feel very uneasy in my mind.’
‘I’m sure you have no cause, Aunt,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but if you feel very much
distressed, I suggest that you simply give her family a little extra for the funeral. In
that way you will more than fulfill any moral obligation you may have towards her as
a mistress.’
‘I have just given her mother fifty taels,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I wanted to give her two
new outfits as well from one of the girls’ wardrobes, but it just so happens that at the
moment none of them apart from your Cousin Lin has got anything new that would
do. Your Cousin Lin has got two sets that we had made for her next birthday, but she
is such a sensitive child and has had so much sickness and misfortune in her life that
I’m afraid she would almost certainly feel superstitious about the clothes made for
her birthday being used for dress?ing a corpse with, so I’ve had to ask the tailors to
make up a couple in a hurry. Of course, if it were any other maid, I should have given
the mother a few taels and that would have been the end of the matter. But though
Golden was only a servant, she had been with me so long that she had become
almost like a daughter to me.’
She began to cry again as she said this.
‘There’s no need to hurry the tailors about this,’ said Bao-?chai. ‘I’ve got two new
outfits that I recently finished making for myself. Why not let her mother have them
and save them the trouble? Golden once or twice wore old dresses of mine in the
past, so I know they will fit her.’
‘That’s very kind of you, but aren’t you superstitious?’ said Lady Wang.
Bao-chai laughed.
‘Don’t worry about that, Aunt. That sort of thing has never bothered me.’
At that she rose and went off to fetch them. Lady Wang hurriedly ordered two of the
servants to go after her.
When Bao-chai returned with the clothes, she found Bao-yu sitting beside his mother
in tears. Lady Wang was evidently in the midst of rebuking him about something, but
as soon as she caught sight of Bao-chai, she closed her mouth and fell silent. From
the scene before her eyes and the word or two she had overheard, Bao-chai was able
to form a pretty good idea of what had been happening. She handed the clothes over
to Lady Wang and Lady Wang summoned Golden’s mother to come and fetch them.
What happened after that will be told in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 33

An envious younger brother puts in a malicious word or two
And a scapegrace elder brother receives a terrible chastisement

OUR story last told how Golden’s mother was summoned to take away the clothing
that Bao-chai had brought for Golden’s laying-out. When she arrived, Lady Wang
called her inside, and after making her an additional present of some jewellery,
advised her to procure the services of some Buddhist monks to recite a sūtra for the
salvation of the dead girl’s soul. Golden’s mother kotowed her thanks and departed
with the clothes and jewellery.

*

The news that Golden’s disgrace had driven her to take her own life had reached
Bao-yu as he was returning from his interview with Jia Yu-cun, and he was already in
a state of shock when he went in to see his mother, only to be subjected by her to a
string of accusations and reproaches, to which he was unable to reply. He availed
himself of the opportunity presented by Bao-chai’s arrival to slip quietly out again,
and wandered along, scarcely knowing where he was going, still in a state of shock,
hands clasped behind him, head down low, and sighing as he went.
Without realizing it he was drifting towards the main re?ception hall, and was in fact
just emerging from behind the screen-wall that masked the gateway leading from the
inner to the outer part of the mansion, when he walked head-on into someone
coming from the opposite direction.
‘Stand where you are!’ said this person in a harsh voice.
Bao-yu looked up with a start and saw that it was his father. He gave an involuntary
gasp of fear and, dropping his hands to his sides, hastily assumed a more deferential
posture.
‘Now,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘will you kindly explain the meaning of these sighs and of this
moping, hang-dog appearance? You took your time coming when Yu-cun called for
you just now, and I gather that when you did eventually vouchsafe your presence, he
found you dull and listless and without a lively word to say for yourself. And look at
you now — sullenness and secret depravity written all over your face! What are
these sighings and groanings supposed to indicate? What have you got to he
discontented or displeased about? Come, sit! What is the meaning of this?’
Bao-yu was normally ready enough with his tongue, but on this occasion grief for
Golden so occupied his mind (at that moment he would very willingly have changed
places with her) that though he heard the words addressed to him by his father, he
failed to take in their meaning and merely stared back at him stupidly.
Seeing him too hypnotized by fear — or so it appeared — to answer with his usual
promptness, Jia Zheng, who had not been angry to start with, was now well on the
way to becoming so; but the irate comment he was about to make was checked
when a servant from the outer gate announced that a representative of ‘His Highness
the Prince of Zhong-shun’ had arrived.
Jia Zheng was puzzled.
‘The Prince of Zhong-shun?’ he thought. ‘I have never had any dealings with the
Prince of Zhong-shun. I wonder why he should suddenly send someone to see
me ...?’
‘He told the man to invite the prince’s messenger to sit in the hall, while he himself
hurried inside and changed into court dress. On entering the hall to receive his visitor,
he found that it was the Prince of Zhong-shun’s chamberlain who had come to see
him. After an exchange of bows and verbal salutations, the two men sat down and
tea was served. The chamberlain cut short the customary civilities by coming straight
to the point.
‘It would have been temerity on my part to have intruded on the leisure of an
illustrious scholar in the privacy of his home, but in fact it is not for the purpose of
paying a social call that I am here, but on orders from His Highness. His Highness has
a small request to make of you. If you will be so good as to oblige hint, not only will
His Highness be extremely grateful himself, but I and my colleagues will also be very
much beholden to you.’
Jia Zheng was totally at a loss to imagine what the purpose of the man’s visit might
be; nevertheless he rose to his feet out of respect for the prince and smiled politely.
‘You have orders from His Highness for me? I shall be happy to perform them if you
will have the goodness to instruct me.’
‘I don’t think any performing will be necessary,’ said the chamberlain drily. ‘All we
want from you is a few words. A young actor called Bijou — a female impersonator —
has gone missing from the palace. He hasn’t been back now for four or five days; and
though we have looked everywhere we can think of, we can’t make out where he can
have got to. How?ever, in the course of the very extensive inquiries we have made
both inside and outside the city, eight out of ten of the people we have spoken to say
that he has recently been very thick with the young gentleman who was born with
the jade in his mouth. Well, obviously we couldn’t come inside here and search as we
would have done if this had been anyone else’s house, so we had to go back and
report the matter to His Highness; and His Highness says that though he could view
the loss of a hundred ordinary actors with equanimity, this Bijou is so skilled in
anticipating his wishes and so essential to his peace of mind that it would be utterly
im?possible for him to dispense with his services. I have therefore come here to
request you to ask your son if he will be good enough to let Bijou come back again.
By doing so he will not only earn the undying gratitude of the Prince, but will also
save me and my colleagues a great deal of tiring and disagreeable searching.’
The chamberlain concluded with a sweeping bow.
Surprised and angered by what he had heard, Jia Zheng immediately sent for Bao-yu,
who presently came hurrying in, ignorant of what the reason for his summons might
be.
‘Miserable scum!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘It is not enough, apparently, that you should
neglect your studies when you are at home. It seems that you must needs go
perpetrating enor?mities outside. This Bijou I have been hearing about is under the
patronage of His Royal Highness the Prince of Zhong-shun. How could you have the
unspeakable effrontery to commit an act of enticement on his person — involving
me, incidentally, in the consequences of your wrong-doing?’
The question made Bao-yu start.
‘I honestly know nothing about this,’ he said. ‘I don’t even know who or what
“Bijou” is, let alone what you mean by “enticement”’.
Jia Zheng was about to exclaim, but the chamberlain fore?stalled him.
‘There is really no point in concealment, young gentleman,’ he said coldly. ‘Even if
you are not hiding him here, we are sure that you know where he is. In either case
you had much better say straight out and save us a lot of trouble. I’d be greatly
obliged if you would.’
‘I really don’t know,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You must have been misinformed.’
The chamberlain gave a sardonic laugh.
‘I have, of course, got evidence for what I am saying and I’m afraid you are doing
yourself little good by forcing me to mention it in front of your father. You say you
don’t know who Bijou is. Very well. Then will you kindly explain how his red
cummerbund came to find its way around your waist?’
Bao-yu stared at him open-mouthed, too stunned to reply.
‘If he knows even a private thing like that,’ he thought, ‘there’s little likelihood of
my being able to hoodwink him about anything else. I’d better get rid of him as
quickly as possible, before he can say any more.’
‘Since you have managed to find out so much about him,’ he said, finding his
tongue at last, ‘I’m surprised that so im?portant a thing as buying a house should
have escaped you. From what I’ve heard, he recently acquired a little villa and an
acre or so of land at Fort Redwood, seven miles east of the walls. I suppose he could
be there.’
The chamberlain smiled.
‘If you say so, then no doubt that is where we shall find him. I shall go and look
there immediately. If I do find him there, you will hear no more from me; if not, I
shall be back again for further instructions.’
So saying, he hurriedly took his leave.
Jia Zheng, his eyes glaring and his mouth contorted with rage, went after the
chamberlain to see him out. He turned briefly towards Bao-yu as he was leaving the
hall.
‘You stay where you are. I shall deal with you when I get back.’
As he was on his way in again after seeing the chamberlain off the premises, Jia Huan
with two or three pages at his heels came stampeding across the courtyard.
‘Hit that boy!’ Jia Zheng shouted, outraged. But Jia Huan, reduced to a quivering
jelly of fear by the sight of his father, had already jolted to a halt and was standing
with bowed head in front of him.
‘And what is the meaning of this?’ said Jia Zheng. ‘What has become of the people
who are supposed to look after you? Why do they allow you to gallop around in this
extraordinary fashion?’ His voice rose to a shout: ‘Where are the people responsible
for taking this boy to school?’
Jia Huan saw in his father’s anger an opportunity of exer?cising his malice.
‘I didn’t mean to run, Father, but just as I was going by the well back there I saw the
body of a maid who had drowned herself — all swollen up with water, and her head
all swollen. It was horrible. I just couldn’t help myself.’
Jia Zheng heard him with incredulous horror.
‘What are you saying? Who has drowned herself? Such a thing has never before
happened in our family. Our family has always been lenient and considerate in its
treatment of in?feriors. It is one of our traditions. I suppose it is because I have been
too neglectful of household matters during these last few years. Those in charge have
felt encouraged to abuse their authority, until finally an appalling thing like this can
happen an innocent young life cut off by violence. What a terrible dis?grace to our
ancestors if this should get about!’ He turned and shouted a command.
‘Fetch Jia Lian and Lai Da!’
‘Sir!’ chorused the pages, and were on the point of doing so when Jia Huan
impulsively stepped forward, threw himself on his knees and clung to his father’s
skirts.
‘Don’t be angry with me, Father, but apart from the ser?vants in Lady Wang’s room,
no one else knows anything about this. I heard my mother say -’
He broke off and glanced around behind him. Jia Zheng understood and signaled with
his eyes to the pages, who obediently withdrew some distance back to either side of
the courtyard. Jia Huan continued in a voice lowered almost to a whisper.
‘My mother told me that the day before yesterday, in Lady Wang’s room, my
brother Bao-yu tried to rape one of Her Ladyship’s maids called Golden, and when
she wouldn’t let him, he gave her a beating; and Golden was so upset that she threw
herself in the well and was drowned --’
Jia Zheng, whose face had now turned to a ghastly gold-leaf colour, interrupted him
with a dreadful cry.
‘Fetch Bao-yu!’
He began to stride towards his study, shouting to all and sundry as he went.
‘If anyone tries to stop me this time, I shall make over my house and property and
my post at the Ministry and every?thing else I have to him and Bao-yu. I absolutely
refuse to be responsible for the boy any longer. I shall cut off my few remaining hairs
(those that worry and wretchedness have left me) and look for some clean and
decent spot to end my days in. Perhaps in that way I shall escape the charge of
having dis?graced my ancestors by rearing this unnatural monster as my son.’
When they saw the state he was in, the literary gentlemen and senior menservants
who were waiting for him in the study, guessed that Bao-yu must be the cause of it
and, looking at each other with various grimaces, biting their thumbs or sticking their
tongues out, hastily retreated from the room. Jia-Zheng entered it alone and sat
down, stiffly upright, in a chair. He was breathing heavily and his face was bathed in
tears. Presently, when he had regained his breath, he barked out a rapid series of
commands:
‘Bring Bao-yu here. Get a heavy bamboo. Get some rope to tie him with. Close the
courtyard gates. If anyone tries to take word through inside, kill him!’
‘Sir! — Sir! — Sir!’ the terrified pages chorused in unison at each of his commands,
and some of them went off to look for Bao-yu.
Jia Zheng’s ominous ‘Stay where you are’ as he went out with the chamberlain had
warned Bao-yu that something dire was imminent — though just how much more
dire as a result of Jia Huan’s malicious intervention he could not have foreseen and as
he stood where his father had left him, he twisted and turned himself about,
anxiously looking for some passer-by who could take a message through to the
womenfolk inside. But no one came. Even the omnipresent Tealeaf was on this
occasion nowhere to be seen. Then suddenly, in answer to his prayers, an old woman
appeared — a darling, precious treasure of an old woman (or so she seemed at that
moment) — and he dashed forward and clung to her beseechingly.
‘Quickly!’ he said. ‘Go and tell them that Sir Zheng is going to beat me. Quickly!
Quickly! Goand tell. GO AND TELL.’
Partly because agitation had made him incoherent and partly because, as ill luck
would have it, the old woman was deaf, almost everything he said had escaped her
except for the ‘Go and tell’, which she misheard as ‘in the well’. She smiled at him
reassuringly.
‘Let her jump in the well then, young master. Don’t you worry your pretty head
about it!’
Realizing that he had deafness, too, to contend with, he now became quite frantic.
‘GO AND TELL MY PAGES.’
‘Her wages?’ the old woman asked in some surprise. ‘Bless you, of course they paid
her wages! Her Ladyship gave a whole lot of money towards the funeral as well. And
clothes. Paid her wages, indeed!’
Bao-yu stamped his feet in a frenzy of impatience. He was still wondering
despairingly how to make her understand when Jia Zheng’s pages arrived and forced
him to go with them to the study.
Jia Zheng turned a pair of wild and bloodshot eyes on him as he entered. Forgetting
the ‘riotous and dissipated conduct abroad leading to the unseemly bestowal of
impudicities on a theatrical performer’ and the ‘neglect of proper pursuits and
studies at home culminating in the attempted violation of a parent’s maidservant’
and all the other high-sounding charges he had been preparing to hurl against him,
he shouted two brief orders to the pages.
‘Gag his mouth. Beat him to death.’
The pages were too frightened not to comply. Two held Bao-yu face downwards on a
bench while a third lifted up the flattened bamboo sweep and began to strike him
with it across the hams. After about a dozen blows Jia Zheng, not satisfied that his
executioner was hitting hard enough, kicked him impatiently aside, wrested the
bamboo from his grasp, and, gritting his teeth, brought it down with the utmost
savagery on the places that had already been beaten.
At this point the literary gentlemen, sensing that Bao-yu was in serious danger of life
and limb, came in again to remonstrate; but Jia Zheng refused to hear them.
‘Ask him what he has done and then tell me if you think I should spare him,’ he said.
‘It is the encouragement of people like you that has corrupted him; and now, when
things have come to this pass, you intercede for him. I suppose you would like me to
wait until he commits parricide, or worse. Would you still intercede for him then?’
They could see from this reply that he was beside himself. Wasting no further time
on words, they quickly withdrew and looked for someone to take a message through
inside.
Lady Wang did not stop to tell Grandmother Jia when she received it. She snatched
up an outer garment, pulled it about her, and, supported by a single maid, rushed off,
not caring what menfolk might see her, to the outer study, bursting into it with such
suddenness that the literary gentlemen and other males present were unable to
avoid her.
Her entry provoked Jia Zheng to fresh transports of fury. Faster and harder fell the
bamboo on the prostrate form of Bao-yu, which by now appeared to be unconscious,
for when the boys holding it down relaxed their hold and fled from their Mistress’s
presence, it had long since ceased even to twitch. Even so Jia Zheng would have
continued beating it had not Lady Wang clasped the bamboo to her bosom and
prevented him.
‘Enough!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Today you are determined, all of you, to drive me insane.’
‘No doubt Bao-yu deserved to be beaten,’ said Lady Wang tearfully, ‘but it is bad for
you to get over excited. Besides, you ought to have some consideration for Lady Jia.
She is not at all well in this frightful heat. It may not seem to you of much
consequence to kill Bao-yu, but think what the effect would be on her.’
‘Don’t try that sort of talk with me!’ said Jia Zheng bitterly. ‘Merely by fathering a
monster like this I have proved myself an unfilial son; yet whenever in the past I have
tried to disci?pline him, the rest of you have all conspired against me to protect him.
Now that I have the opportunity at last, I may as well finish off what I have begun and
put him down, like the vermin he is, before he can do any more damage.’
So saying, he took up a rope and would have put his threat into execution, had not
Lady Wang held her arms around him to prevent it.
‘Of course you should discipline your son,’ she said, weep?ing, ‘but you have a wife
too, Sir Zheng, don’t forget. I am nearly fifty now and this wretched boy is the only
son I have. If you insist on making an example of him, I dare not do much to dissuade
you. But to kill him outright that is deliberately to make me childless. Better strangle
me first, if you are going to strangle him. Let the two of us die together. At least I
shall have some support then in the world to come, if all support in this world is to
be denied me!’
With these words she threw herself upon Bao-yu’s body and, lifting up her voice,
began weeping with noisy abandon. Jia Zheng, who had heard her with a sigh, sank
into a chair and himself broke down in a fit of weeping.
Presently Lady Wang began to examine the body she was clasping. Bao-yu’s face was
ashen, his breathing was scarcely perceptible, and the trousers of thin green silk
which clothed the lower part of his body were so soaked with blood that their colour
was no longer recognizable. Feverishly she un?fastened his waistband and drew
them back. Everywhere, from the upper part of his buttocks down to his calves, was
either raw and bloody or purplish black with bruises. Not an inch of sound flesh was
to be seen. The sight made her cry out involuntarily.
‘Oh my son! My unfortunate son!’
Once more she broke down into uncontrollable weeping.
Her own words reminded her of the son she had already lost, and now, with added
bitterness, she began to call out his name.
‘Oh, Zhu! Zhu! If only you had lived, I shouldn’t have minded losing a hundred other
sons!’
By this time news of Lady Wang’s démarche had circulated to the other members of
the inner mansion and Li Wan, Xi-feng, Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun had come to
join her. The invocation of her dead husband’s name, painful to all of them, was
altogether too much for Li Wan, who broke into loud sobs on hearing it. Jia Zheng
himself was deeply affected, and tears as round as pumpkins rolled down both his
cheeks. It was beginning to look as if they might all go on weeping there indefinitely,
since no one would make a move; but just then there was a cry of ‘Her Old
Ladyship—!’ from one of the maids, interrupted by a quavering voice outside the
window.
‘Kill me first! You may as well kill both of us while you are about it!’
As much distressed by his mother’s words as he was alarmed by her arrival, Jia Zheng
hurried out to meet her. She was leaning on the shoulder of a little maid, her old
head swaying from side to side with the effort of running, and pant?ing as she ran.
Jia Zheng bowed down before her and his face assumed the semblance of a smile.
‘Surely, Mother, in such hot weather as this there is no need for you to come here?
If you have any instructions, you should call for me and let me come to you.’
Grandmother Jia had stopped when she heard this voice and now stood panting for
some moments while she regained her breath. When she spoke, her voice had an
unnatural shrillness in it.
‘Oh! Are you speaking to me? — Yes, as a matter of fact I have got instructions”, as
you put it; but as unfortunately I’ve never had a good son who cares for me, there’s
no one I can give them to.’
Wounded in his most sensitive spot, Jia Zheng fell on his knees before her. The voice
in which he replied to her was broken with tears.
‘How can I bear it, Mother, if you speak to me like that? What I did to the boy I did
for the honour of the family.’
Grandmother Jia spat contemptuously.
‘A single harsh word from me and you start whining that you can’t bear it. How do
you think Bao-yu could bear your cruel rod? And you say you’ve been punishing him
for the honour of the family, but you just tell me this: did your own father ever
punish yon in such a way? I think not.’
She was weeping now herself.
‘Don’t upset yourself, Mother,’ said Jia Zheng, with the same forced smile. ‘I acted
too hastily. From now on I’ll never beat him again, if that’s what you wish.’
‘Hoity-toity, keep your temper!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘He’s your son. If you want
to beat him, that’s up to you. If we women are in your way, we’ll leave you alone to
get on with it.’ She turned to her attendants. ‘Call my carriage. Your Mistress and I
and Bao-yu are going back to Nanking. We shall be leaving immediately.’
The servants made a show of compliance.
‘No need for you to cry,’ she said, turning to Lady Wang. ‘You love Bao-yu now that
he’s young, but when he’s grown up and become an important official, he’ll like
enough forget that you’re his mother. Much better force yourself not to love him
now and save yourself some anguish later on.’
Jia Zheng threw himself forward on his face.
‘Don’t say that, Mother! Don’t reject your own son!’
‘On the contrary,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘it is you who have rejected me’. But don’t
worry. When I have gone back to Nanking, there will be no one here to stop you. You
can beat away to your heart’s content.’ She turned to the servants.
‘Come on, hurry up with that packing! And get the carriage and horses ready so
that we can be on our way.’
Jia Zheng’s kotows were by now describing the whole quarter circle from
perpendicular to ground. But the old lady walked on inside, ignoring him.
From the sight that met her eyes she could tell that this had been no ordinary
beating. It filled her with anguish for the sufferer and fresh anger for the man who
had inflicted it, and for a long time she clung to the inert form and wept, only
gradually calming down under the combined coaxing of Lady Wang, Xi-feng and Li
Wan.
At this point several of the maids and women servants came forward and attempted
to raise Bao-yu to his feet.
‘Idiots!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Haven’t you got eyes in your heads? Can’t you see that he’s in
no fit state to walk? Go and get that wicker summer-bed from inside and carry him in
on that.’
The servants rushed out and presently reappeared carrying a long, narrow couch of
woven rattan between them, on to which they lifted Bao-yu. Then, with
Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang and the rest of the womenfolk leading the way, they
carried him to Grandmother Jia’s apartment and set him down inside it.
Jia Zheng, conscious that his mother’s wrath against him had not abated and
unwilling to leave things where they stood, had followed the little procession inside.
His eyes travelled from Bao-yu, who, he now saw, really had been beaten very badly,
to Lady Wang. She was sobbing bitterly, interspersing her sobs with cries of ‘My
child!’ and ‘My son!’. Presently she broke off and began railing at the object of her
sorrow: ‘Why couldn’t you have died instead of Zhu? Zhu wouldn’t have made his
father angry the way you do and I should have been spared this constant anxiety.
What is to become of me if you go away and leave me, too?’ Then, with a cry of ‘Poor,
worthless boy!’, she fell once more to weeping. When Jia Zheng heard this, his own
heart was softened and he began to wish that he had not beaten the boy quite so
savagely. He tried to find words of comfort for his old mother, but she answered him
tearfully.
‘A father ought to punish his son if he’s done wrong, but not like that! — Why don’t
you go now? Won’t you be content until you’ve seen the boy die under your own
eyes?’
Jia Zheng, with flustered deference, withdrew.
By now Aunt Xue, Bao-chai, Caltrop, Aroma and Shi Xiang-yun were there too. Aroma
was deeply distressed, but could not show the extent of her feelings in the presence
of so many others. Indeed, Bao-yu was so ringed around with people fanning him or
forcing water through his lips that there was nothing she could have done for him if
she had tried. Feeling somewhat superfluous, she left the apartment and went out to
the inner gate, where she asked the pages to look for Tealeaf, so that she could find
out what had hap?pened.
‘Why did the Master suddenly beat him like that?’ she asked Tealeaf when he
arrived. ‘He hadn’t been doing any?thing. And why couldn’t you have warned us in
time?’
Tealeaf was indignant.
‘I couldn’t help it, I wasn’t there. He was half-way through beating him before I
even got to hear about it. I did my best to find out the reason, though. It seems that
there were two things the Master was upset about: one was to do with Bijou and the
other was to do with Golden.’
‘How did the Master get to know about them?’ said Aroma. ‘Well, the Bijou
business he probably knew about indirectly through Mr Xue,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Mr Xue
had been feeling very jealous, and it looks as though he may have put someone else
up to telling the Master about it out of spite. And Golden he probably heard about
from Master Huan - leastways, that’s what the Master’s own people told me.’
The two reasons Tealeaf had given corresponded well enough with Aroma’s own
observations, and she was more than half inclined to believe them. Fairly confident,
therefore, that she now knew the cause of what had happened, she re?turned once
more to the apartment. The ministrations of those surrounding Bao-yu had by now
restored him to fall consciousness, and Grandmother Jia was instructing the
ser?vants to carry him back to his own room. There was an answering cry and
something of a scramble as many willing hands lifted up the cane bed. Then,
preceded as before by Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang and the rest, they carried him
through into the Garden and back to Green Delights, where they finally got him on to
his own bed. After a good deal more bustle they gradually all drifted away and Aroma
at last had Bao-yu alone to herself.
But in order to know what happened then, you must refer to the following chapter.
CHAPTER 34

A wordless message meets with silent understanding
And a groundless imputation leads to undeserved rebukes



WHEN she saw that Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang and the rest had all gone, Aroma
went and sat down at Bao-yu’s bed?side and asked him, with tears in her eyes, the
reason why he had been beaten so severely.
Bao-yu sighed.
‘Oh, the usual things. Need you ask? I wish you’d take a look down below, though,
and tell me if anything’s broken. It’s hurting so dreadfully down there.’
Very gently Aroma inserted her fingers into the top of his trousers and began to draw
them off. She had barely started when he gritted his teeth and let out a cry, and she
had to stop immediately. This happened three or four times before she finally
succeeded in getting them off. The sight revealed made her grit her own teeth.
‘Mother of mine!’ she gasped, ‘he must have hit you savagely. If only you’d listened
to me a bit in the past, it would never have come to this. Why, you might have been
crippled for life. It doesn’t bear thinking of.’
Just then Bad-chai’s arrival was announced by one of the maids. Since putting his
trousers on again was out of the question, Aroma snatched up a lightweight coverlet
and hur?riedly threw it over him. Bao-chai came in carrying a large tablet of some
sort of solid medicine which she instructed Aroma to pound up in wine and apply to
Bao-yu’s injuries in the evening.
‘This is a decongestant,’ she said, handing it to her. ‘It will take away the
inflammation by dispersing the bad blood in his bruises. After that, he should heal
quite quickly.’
She turned to Bao-yu.
‘Are you feeling any better now?’
Bao-yu thanked her. Yes, he said, he was feeling a little better, and invited her to sit
down beside him. Bao-chai was relieved to see him with his eyes open and talking
again. She shook her head sadly.
‘If you had listened to what one said, this would never have happened. Everyone is
so upset now. It isn’t only Grandmother and Lady Wang, you know. Even—’
She checked herself abruptly, regretting that she had allowed her feelings to run
away with her, and lowered her head, blushing. Bao-yu had sensed hidden depths of
feeling in the passionate earnestness of her tone, and when she suddenly faltered
and turned red, there was something so touching about the pretty air of confusion
with which she dropped her head and played with the ends of her girdle, that his
spirits soared and his pain was momentarily forgotten.
‘What have I undergone but a few whacks of the bamboo?’ he thought, ‘—yet
already they are so sad and concerned about me! What dear, adorable, sweet, noble
girls they are! Heaven knows how they would grieve for me if I were actually to die! It
would be almost worth dying, just to find out. The loss of a life’s ambitions would be
a small price to pay, and I should be a peevish, ungrateful ghost if I did not feel proud
and happy when such darling creatures were grieving for me.’
He was roused from this reverie by the sound of Bao-chai’s voice asking Aroma what
it was that had moved his father to such violent anger against him. Aroma’s low reply,
in which she merely repeated what Tealeaf had told her, was his first inkling of the
part that Jia Huan had played in his misfortune. Her mention of Xue Pan’s
involvement, however, made him apprehensive that Bao-chai might feel embarrassed,
and he hastily interrupted Aroma to prevent her from saying more.
Old Xue would never do a thing like that,’ he said. ‘It’s silly to make these wild
assertions.’
Bao-chai knew that it was out of respect for her feelings that he was silencing Aroma,
and she wondered at his considerateness.
‘What delicacy of feeling!’ she thought, ‘after so terrible a beating and in spite of all
the pain, to be still able to worry about the possibility of someone else’s being
offended! If only you could apply some of that thoughtfulness to the more important
things of life, my friend, you would make my Uncle so happy; and then perhaps these
awful things would never happen. And when all’s said and done, this sensibility on
my behalf is rather wasted. Do you really think I know my own brother so little that I
am unaware of his unruly nature? Nothing has ever been allowed to stand in the way
of Pan’s desires. Look at the terrible trouble he made for you that time over Qin
Zhong. That was a long time ago, and I am sure he has got much worse since then.’
Those were her thoughts, but what she said was:
‘There’s really no need to look around for someone to blame. If you ask me, the
mere fact that Cousin Bao has been willing to keep such company was in itself quite
enough to make Uncle angry. And though my brother can be very tactless and may
well have let something out about Cousin Bao in the course of conversation, I’m sure
it wouldn’t have been deliberate trouble-making on his part. In the first place, it is,
after all, true, what he is supposed to have said: Cousin Bao has been going around
with that actor. And in the second place, my brother simply hasn’t got it in him to be
discreet. You have lived all your life with sensitive, considerate people like Cousin Bao,
my dear Aroma. You have never had to deal with a crude, forthright person like my
brother someone who says whatever comes into his head with complete dis?regard
for the consequences.’
When Bao-yu cut short her remarks about Xue Pan, Aroma had realized at once that
she was being tactless and inwardly prayed that Bao-chai had not taken exception to
them. To her, therefore, these words of Bao-chai’s were a source of tongue-tied
embarrassment. Bao-yu, on the other hand, could see in them only the refusal of a
frank and generous nature to admit deviousness in others and a sensibility capable of
matching and responding to his own. As a consequence his spirits soared yet higher.
He was about to say something, but Bao-chai rose to her feet and anticipated him.
‘I’ll come and see you again tomorrow. You must rest now and give yourself a
chance to get well. I’ve given Aroma something to make a lotion with. Get her to put
it on for you in the evening. I can guarantee that it will hasten your re?covery.’
She was moving towards the door as she said this. When she was outside, Aroma
hurried after her to see her off and to thank her for her trouble.
‘As soon as he’s better,’ she said, ‘Master Bao will come over and thank you himself,
Miss.’
‘It’s nothing at all,’ said Bao-chai, turning back to her with a smile. ‘Do tell him to
rest properly, though, and not to brood. And if there’s anything at all he wants, just
quietly come round to my place for it. Don’t go bothering Lady Jia or Lady Wang or
any of the others, in case my uncle gets to hear of it. It probably wouldn’t matter at
the time, but it might do later on, next time there is any trouble.’
With that she left, and Aroma turned back into the court?yard, her heart full of
gratitude for Bao-chai’s kindness. Re?entering Bao-yu’s room, she found him lying
back quietly, plunged in thought. From the look of it, he was already half asleep.
Tiptoeing out again, she went off to wash her hair.
But it was difficult for Bao-yu to lie quietly for very long. The pain in his buttocks was
like the stabbing and pricking of knives and needles and there was a burning
sensation in them as if he were being grilled over a fire, so that the slightest
movement made him cry out. Already it was growing late. Aroma appeared to have
gone away, but two or three maids were still in attendance. As there was nothing
that they could do for him, he told them that they might go off and prepare
themselves for the night, provided that they remained within call. The maids
accordingly withdrew, leaving him on his own.
He had dozed off. The shadowy form of Jiang Yu-han had come in to tell him of his
capture by the Prince of Zhong?-shun’s men, followed, shortly after, by Golden, who
gave him a tearful account of how she had drowned herself. In his half? dream,
half-awake state he was having the greatest difficulty in attending to what they were
saying, when suddenly he felt someone pushing him and became dimly aware of a
sound of weeping in his ear. He gave a start. Fully awake now, he opened his eyes. It
was Lin Dai-yu. Suspecting this, too, to be a dream, he raised his head to look. A pair
of eyes swollen like peaches met his own, and a face that was glistening with tears. It
was Dai-yu all right, no doubt about that. He would have looked longer, but the strain
of raising himself was causing such excruciating pain in his nether parts, that he fell
back again with a groan. The groan was followed by a sigh.
‘Now what have you come for?’ he said. ‘The sun’s not long set and the ground
must still be very hot underfoot. You could still get a heat-stroke at this time of day,
and that would he a fine how-do-you-do. Actually, in spite of the beating, I don’t feel
very much pain. This fuss I make is put on to fool the others. I’m hoping they’ll
spread the word around outside how badly I’ve been hurt, so that Father gets to hear
of it. It’s all shamming, really. You mustn’t be taken in by it.’
Dai-yu’s sobbing had by this time ceased to be audible; but somehow her strangled,
silent weeping was infinitely more pathetic than the most clamorous grief. At that
moment volumes would have been inadequate to contain the things she wanted to
say to him; yet all she could get out, after struggling for some time with her choking
sobs, was
‘I suppose you’ll change now.’
Bao-yu gave a long sigh.
‘Don’t worry, I shan’t change. People like that are worth dying for. I wouldn’t
change if he killed me.’
The words were scarcely out of his mouth when they heard someone outside in the
courtyard saying:
‘Mrs Lian has come.’
Dai-yu had no wish to see Xi-feng, and rose to her feet hurriedly.
Bao-yu seized hold of her hand.
‘Now that’s funny. Why should you start being afraid of her all of a sudden?’
She stamped with impatience.
‘Look at the state my eyes are in I’ she said. ‘I don’t want them all making fun of me
again.’
At that Bao-yu released her hand and she bounded round to the back of the bed,
slipping into the rear courtyard just as Xi-feng was entering the room from the front.
‘A bit better now?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Is there anything you feel like eating yet? If there is,
tell them to come round to my place and get it.’
As soon as Xi-feng had gone, Bao-yu was visited by Aunt Xue, and shortly after that
by someone whom his grandmother had sent to see how he was getting on. At
lighting-up time, after taking a few mouthfuls of soup, he settled down into a fitful
sleep.
Just then a new group of visitors arrived, consisting of Zhou Rui’s wife, Wu Xin-deng’s
wife, Zheng Hao-shi’s wife, and those other members of the mansion’s female staff
who had had most to do with Bao-yu in the past and who, having heard of his beating,
were anxious to see how he was. Aroma came out smiling on to the verandah to
welcome them.
‘You’re just too late to see him, ladies,’ she told them in a low voice. ‘He’s just this
minute dropped off.’
She ushered them into the Outer room, invited them to be seated, and served them
with tea. After sitting there very quietly for several minutes, they got up to take their
leave, requesting Aroma as they did so that she would inform Bao-yu when he waked
that they had been round to ask about him. Aroma promised to do so and showed
them out. Just as she was about to go in again, an old woman arrived from Lady
Wang’s to say that ‘Her Ladyship would like to see one of Master Bao’s people.’ After
reflecting for a moment, Aroma turned to the house and called softly to Skybright,
Musk and Ripple inside.
‘Her Ladyship wants to see someone, so I’m going over. Stay indoors and keep an
eye on things while I’m away. I shan’t be long.’
Then she followed the old woman out of the Garden and round to Lady Wang’s
apartment in the central courtyard. She found Lady Wang sitting on a cane
summer-bed and fanning herself with a palm leaf fan. She appeared not entirely
pleased when she saw that it was Aroma.
‘You could have sent one of the others,’ she said. ‘There was no need for you to
come and leave him unattended.’
Aroma smiled reassuringly.
‘Master Bao has just settled down for the night, Madam. If he should want
anything, the others are nowadays quite capable of looking after him on their own.
Your Ladyship has no need to worry. I thought I had better come myself and not send
one of the others, in case Your Ladyship had something important to tell us. I was
afraid that if I sent one of the others, they might not understand what you wanted.’
‘I have nothing in particular to tell you,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I merely wanted to ask
about my son. How is the pain now?’
‘Much better since I put on some of the lotion that Miss Bao brought for him,’ said
Aroma. ‘It was so bad before that he couldn’t lie still, but now he’s sleeping quite
soundly, so you can tell it must be better than it was.’
‘Has he had anything to eat yet?’ said Lady Wang.
‘He had a few sips of some soup Her Old Ladyship sent,’ said Aroma, ‘but that’s all
he would take. He kept complain?ing that he felt dry. He wanted me to give him plum
bitters to drink, but of course that’s an astringent, and I thought to myself that as he’
d just had a beating and not been allowed to cry out during it, a lot of hot blood and
hot poison must have been driven inwards and still be collected round his heart, and
if he were to drink some of that stuff, it might stir them up and bring on a serious
illness, so I talked him out of it. After a lot of persuading, I got him to take some rose
syrup instead, that I mixed up in water for him; but after only half a cup of it he said it
tasted sickly and he couldn’t get it down.’
‘Oh dear, I wish you’d told me sooner,’ said Lady Wang. ‘We were sent some bottles
of flavouring the other day that I could have let you have. As a matter of fact I was
going to send him some of them, but then I thought that if I did they would probably
only get wasted, so I didn’t. If he can’t manage the rose syrup, I can easily give you a
few of them to take back with you. You need only mix a teaspoonful of essence in a
cupful of water. The flavours are quite delicious.’ She called Suncloud to her. ‘Fetch
me a few of those bottles of flavouring essence that were sent us the other day.’
‘Two will be enough,’ said Aroma, ‘otherwise it will only get wasted. If we run out, I
can always come back for more later.’
Suncloud was gone for a considerable time. Eventually she returned with two little
glass bottles, each about three inches high, which she handed to Aroma. They had
screw on silver tops and yellow labels. One of them was labelled ‘Essence of Cassia
Flower’ and the other one ‘Essence of Roses’.
‘What tiny little bottles!’ said Aroma. ‘They can’t hold very much. I suppose the
stuff inside them must be very precious.’
‘It was made specially for the Emperor,’ said Lady Wang. ‘That’s what the yellow
labels mean. Haven’t you seen labels like that before? Mind you look after them and
don’t let the stuff in them get wasted.’
Aroma promised to be careful and began to go.
‘Just a minute!’ said Lady Wang. ‘I’ve thought of some-thing else that I wanted to
ask you.’
Aroma returned. Lady Wang first glanced about her to make sure that no one else
was in the room, then she said:
‘I think I heard someone say that Bao-yu’s beating today was because of something
that Huan had said to Sir Zheng. I suppose you don’t happen to have heard anything
about that?’
‘No. I haven’t heard anything about that,’ said Aroma. ‘What I heard was that it was
because Master Bao had been going around with one of Prince Somebody or other’s
players and the Master was told about it by someone who called.’
Lady Wang nodded her head mysteriously.
‘Yes, that was one of the reasons. But there was another reason as well.’
‘I really know nothing about any other reason, Your Lady?ship,’ said Aroma. She
dropped her head and hesitated a moment before going on. ‘I wonder if I might be
rather bold and say something very outspoken to Your Ladyship? Really and truly ’
She faltered.
‘Please go on.’
‘I will if Your Ladyship will promise not to he angry with me.’
‘That’s all right,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Just tell me what you have to say.’
‘Well, really and truly,’ said Aroma, ‘Master Bao needed punishing. If the Master
didn’t keep an eye on him, there’s no knowing what he mightn’t get up to.’
‘My child,’ said Lady Wang with a warmth rarely seen in her, ‘those are exactly my
own sentiments. How clever of you to have understood! Of course, I know perfectly
well that Bao-yu is in need of discipline; and anyone who saw how strict I used to be
with Mr Zhu would realize that I am capable of exercising it. But I have my reasons. A
woman of fifty cannot expect to bear any more children and Bao-yu is now the only
son I have. He is not a very strong boy; and his Grannie dotes on him. I daren’t risk
being strict. I daren’t risk losing another son. I daren’t risk angering Her Old Ladyship
and upsetting the whole household. I do once in a while have it out with him but
though I have argued and pleaded and wept, it doesn’t do any good. He seems all
right at the time, but he’ll be just the same again a short while afterwards and I
always know that I have failed to reach him. Jam afraid he has to suffer before he can
learn but suppose it’s too much for him? - suppose he doesn’t get over this beating?
What will become of me?’
She began to cry.
Seeing her mistress so distressed, Aroma herself was affected and began to cry too.
‘I can understand Your Ladyship being so upset,’ she said, ‘when he’s your own son.
Even we servants that have been with him for a few years get worried about him. The
most that we can ever hope for is to do our duty and get by without too much
trouble but even that won’t be possible if he goes on the way he has been doing. I’m
always telling him to change his ways. Every day every hour I tell him. But it’s no use;
he won’t listen. Of course, if these people will make so much fuss of him, you can
hardly blame him for going round with them though it does make our job more
difficult. But now that Your Ladyship has spoken like this, it puts me in mind of
something that’s been worrying me which I should like to have asked Your Ladyship’s
advice about, only I was afraid you might take it amiss, and then not only should I
have spoken to no purpose, but I should leave myself without even a grave to lie in...’
It was evident to Lady Wang that what she was struggling to get out was a matter of
some consequence.
‘What is it you want to tell me, my child?’ she said kindly. ‘I’ve heard a lot of people
praising you recently, and I confess that I assumed it must be because you took
special pains in serving Bao-yu or in making yourself agreeable to other people —
little things of that sort. But I see that I was wrong. These are not at all little things
that you have been talking about. What you have said so far makes very good sense
and entirely accords with my own opinion of the matter. So if you have anything to
tell me, I should like to hear it. But I must ask you not to discuss it with anyone else.’
‘All I really wanted to ask,’ said Aroma, ‘was if Your Lady?ship could advise me how
later on we can somehow or other contrive to get Master Bao moved back outside
the Garden,’
Lady Wang looked startled and clutched Aroma’s hand in some alarm.
‘I hope Bao-yu hasn’t been doing something dreadful with one of the girls?’
‘Oh no, Your Ladyship, please don’t suspect that!’ said Aroma hurriedly. ‘That
wasn’t my meaning at all. It’s just that—if you’ll allow me to say so—Master Bao and
the young ladies are beginning to grow up now, and though they are all cousins,
there is the difference of sex between them, which makes it very awkward
sometimes when they are all living together, especially in the case of Miss Lin and
Miss Bao, who aren’t even of the same clan. One can’t help feeling uneasy. Even to
outsiders it looks like a very strange sort of family. They say “where nothing happens,
imagination is busiest”, and I’m sure lots of unaccountable misfortunes begin when
some innocent little thing we did unthinkingly gets mis?construed in someone else’s
imagination and reported as something terrible. We just have to be on our guard
against that sort of thing happening especially when Master Bao has such a peculiar
character, as Your Ladyship knows, and spends all his time with girls. He only has to
make the tiniest slip in an unguarded moment, and whether he really did anything or
not, with so many people about and some of them no better than they should be
there is sure to be scandal. For you know what some of these people are like, Your
Ladyship. If they feel well-disposed towards you, they’ll make you out to be a saint;
but if they’re not, then Heaven help you! If Master Bao lives to be spoken well of’ we
can count ourselves lucky; but the way things are, it only needs someone to breathe
a word of scandal and - I say nothing of what will happen to us servants—it’s of no
consequence if we’re all chopped up for mincemeat—but what’s more important,
Master Bao’s reputa?tion will be destroyed for life and all the care and worry Your
Ladyship and Sir Zheng have had on his account will have been wasted. I know Your
Ladyship is very busy and can’t be expected to think of everything, and I probably
shouldn’t have thought of this myself, but once I had thought of it, it seemed to me
that it would be wrong of me not to tell Your Ladyship, and it’s been preying on my
mind ever since. The only reason I haven’t mentioned it before is because I was
afraid Your Ladyship might be angry with me.’
What Aroma had just been saying about misconstructions and scandals so exactly
fitted what had in fact happened in the case of Golden that for a moment Lady Wang
was quite taken aback. But on reflection she felt nothing but love and gratitude for
this humble servant-girl who had shown so much solici?tude on her behalf.
‘It is very perceptive of you, my dear, to have thought it all out so carefully,’ she said.
‘I have, of course, thought about this matter myself’ but other things have put it from
my mind, and what you have just said has reminded me. It is most thoughtful of you.
You are a very, very good girl — Well, you may go now. I think I now know what to do.
There is just one thing before you go, though. Now that you have spoken to me like
this, I am going to place Bao-yu entirely in your hands. Be very careful with him,
won’t you? Remember that anything you do for him you will be doing also for me.
You will find that I am not ungrateful.’
Aroma stood for a moment with bowed head, weighing the import of these words.
Then she said:
‘I will do what Your Ladyship has asked me to the utmost of my ability.’
She left the apartment slowly and made her way back to Green Delights, pondering
-as she went. When she arrived, Bao-yu had just woken up, so she told him about the
flavourings. He was pleased and made her mix some for him straight away. It was
quite delicious. He kept thinking about Dai-yu and wanted to send someone over to
see her, but he was afraid that Aroma would disapprove, so, as a means of getting
her out of the way, he sent her over to Bao-chai’s place to borrow a book. As soon as
she had gone, he summoned Skybright.
‘I want you to go to Miss Lin’s for me,’ he said. ‘Just see what she’s doing, and if she
asks about me, tell her I’m all right.’
‘I can’t go rushing in there bald-headed without a reason,’ said Skybright. ‘You’d
better give me some kind of a message, just to give me an excuse for going there.’
‘I have none to give,’ said Bao-yu.
‘Well, give me something to take, then,’ said Skybright, ‘or think of something I can
ask her for. Otherwise it will look so silly.’
Bao-yu thought for a bit and then, reaching out and picking up two of his old
handkerchiefs, he tossed them towards her with a smile.
‘All right. Tell her I said you were to give her these.’
‘That’s an odd sort of present!’ said Skybright. ‘What’s she going to do with a pair
of your old handkerchiefs? Most likely she’ll think you’re making fun of her and get
upset again.’
‘No she won’t,’ said Bao-yu. ‘She’ll understand.’
Skybright deemed it pointless to argue, so she picked up the handkerchiefs and went
off to the Naiad’s House. Little Deli?cate, who was hanging some towels out to dry on
the verandah railings, saw her enter the courtyard and attempted to wave her away.
‘She’s gone to bed.’
Skybright ignored her and went on inside. The lamps had not been lit and the room
was in almost total darkness. The voice of Dai-yu, lying awake in bed, spoke to her
out of the shadows.
‘Who is it?’
‘Skybright.’
‘What do you want?’
‘Master Bao has sent me with some handkerchiefs, Miss?
Dai-yu seemed to hesitate. She found the gift puzzling and was wondering what it
could mean.
‘I suppose they must be very good ones,’ she said. ‘Prob?ably someone gave them
to him. Tell him to keep them and give them to some body else. I have no use for
them just now myself.’
Skybright laughed.
‘They’re not new ones, Miss. They’re two of his did, everyday ones.’
This was even more puzzling. Dai-yu thought very hard for some moments. Then
suddenly, in a flash, she understood.
‘Put them down. You may go now.’
Skybright did as she was bid and withdrew. All the way back to Green Delights she
tried to make sense of what had happened, but it continued to mystify her.
Meanwhile the message that eluded Skybright had thrown Dai-yu into a turmoil of
conflicting emotions.
‘I feel so happy,’ she thought, ‘that in the midst of his own affliction he has been
able to grasp the cause of all my trouble.
‘And yet at the same time I am sad,’ she thought; ‘because how do I know that my
trouble will end in the way I want it to?
‘Actually, I feel rather amused,’ she thought. ‘Fancy his sending a pair of old
handkerchiefs like that! Suppose I hadn’t understood what he was getting at?
‘But I feel alarmed that he should be sending presents to me in secret.
‘Oh, and I feel so ashamed when I think how I am forever crying and quarrelling,’
she thought, ‘and all the time he has understood! …’
And her thoughts carried her this way and that, until the ferment of excitement
within her cried out to be expressed. Careless of what the maids might think, she
called for a lamp, sat herself down at her desk, ground some ink, softened her brush,
and proceeded to compose the following quatrains, using the handkerchiefs
themselves to write on:

1
                  Seeing my idle teats, you ask me why
                  These foolish drops fall from my teeming eye:
                  Then know, your gift, being by the merfolk made,
                  In merman’s currency must be repaid.

2
                  Jewelled drops by day in secret sorrow shed
                  Or, in the night-time, in my wakeful bed,
                  Lest sleeve or pillow they should spot or stain,
                       Shall on these gifts shower down their salty rain.

3
                 Yet silk preserves but ill the Naiad’s tears:
                       Each salty trace of them fast disappears.
             Only the speckled bamboo stems that grow
                 Outside the window still her tear marks show.

She had only half-filled the second handkerchief and was pre?paring to write another
quatrain, when she became aware that her whole body was burning hot all over and
her cheeks were afire. Going over to the dressing table, she removed the brocade
cover from the mirror and peered into it.
‘Hmn! “Brighter than the peach-flower’s hue”,’ she mur?mured complacently to the
flushed face that stared out at her from the glass, and, little imagining that what she
had been witnessing was the first symptom of a serious illness, went back to bed, her
mind full of handkerchiefs.
*

From Dai-yu and her handkerchiefs let us return to Aroma, who, it will be
remembered, bad been sent off to Bao-chai’s for a book. When she got there, she
found that Bao-chai was not in the Garden, having gone round to her mother’s place
outside. Not liking to return empty-handed, she waited for Bao-chai to return. It was
already the beginning of the first watch when she did so.
Knowing her brother as she did, Bao-chai had already, even before hearing anything
to that effect, suspected that he was in some way responsible for Bao-yu’s
misfortune. What Aroma had earlier on told her had therefore been no more than
con?firmation of an already existing suspicion. Yet Aroma had only been echoing
what Tealeaf had told her; and what Tealeaf had told her was pure guesswork
without a shred of evidence to support it. Thus what started in everyone’s mind as a
sus?picion, repetition very soon compounded into a certainty. Yet the ironical fact
was that he who by his past behaviour had so richly merited the reputation which
had caused them to sus?pect him was totally innocent on the one occasion when
every?one was most unshakeably convinced of his guilt.
The object of this misunderstanding had on this particular evening returned home
having had a good deal to drink out?side. He greeted his mother and then, observing
that his sister, too, was sitting there, addressed a few desultory remarks to her.
Suddenly he seemed to remember something.
‘I hear young Bao-yu’s been in trouble,’ he said. ‘What was it about?’
This was too much for Aunt Xue, who had been seething inwardly and now broke out
in a fury.
‘Shameless villain! How can you have the face to ask such a question? You know
very well it was all your doing?
Xue Pan stared at her in astonishment.
‘What do you mean, “all my doing”?’
‘Don’t act the injured innocent with me!’ said his mother. ‘Everyone knows it was
you who told.’
‘Oh, and I suppose if everyone said I’d killed somebody, you’d believe that too!’
‘Even your sister knows it was you. I suppose you’re not going to call her a liar?’
Bao-chai hurriedly intervened.
‘Don’t shout so, both of you! If you’d be a bit more -calm and collected, you might
have some chance of getting at the truth.’ She turned to Xue Pan: ‘Anyway, whether it
was you or wasn’t you, the damage is done now. There doesn’t seem much point in
raking it over or making an issue of it. My advice to you is to keep out of mischief
from now on and stop interfering in other people’s affairs. When you spend day after
day fooling around outside, sooner or later something is bound to happen; and you
are such a thoughtless creature, that when it does, people naturally suspect that you
are the one to blame, even if you aren’t. I know I do!’
Xue Pan, for all his faults, was a forthright, outspoken sort of fellow, unused to such
ostrich-like avoidance of the issue. Bao-chai’s strictures about ‘fooling around’ and
his mother’s insistence that he had brought about Bao-yu’s beating by means of a
deliberate indiscretion had exasperated him beyond endurance. He jumped about
excitedly, protesting with the most solemn and desperate oaths that he was
innocent.
‘I’d like to find the comedian who’s been making up these stories about me,’ he
shouted, turning in anger upon the domestics. ‘I’ll smash his rotten face in if I do. Of
course, I know what this is all about: you all want to show how con?cerned you are
for poor, darling Bao-yu, so you’ve decided to do it at my expense. What is he,
anyway? a Deva King? Every time his dad gives him a few whacks on the bum, the
whole household is in a state of uproar about it for days on end. I remember that
time Uncle Zheng beat him for doing something he shouldn’t have and old Lady Jia
decided that Cousin Zhen was at the bottom of it. She had the poor so-and-so hauled
up in front of her and there was hell to pay. Now, this time, you want to drag me into
it. All right then I don’t care. A life for a life. I’ll go in there and kill the little blighter
then you can all do what you like to me.’
In the midst of this bawling he had picked up a door bar and was evidently going off
to execute his threat; but his dis?traught mother clung to him and prevented him
from going.
‘You stupid creature!’ she said. ‘Who do you think you’re going to hit with that? If
you’re going to hit anyone, you’d better begin with me!’
Xue Pan’s exasperation had now reached such a pitch that his eyes stood out in his
head like a pair of copper bells.
‘This is rich!’ he shouted. ‘You won’t let me go and finish him off, yet you won’t
stop provoking me by making up all these lies. Every day that fellow stays alive means
one more day of nagging and lies for me to put up with. We’d much better die, the
pair of us, and make an end of it!’
‘Have a little self-control!’ said Bao-chai, joining in her mother’s efforts to restrain
him. ‘Can’t you see how upset poor Mamma is? You ought to be trying to calm her,
not making things worse with this uproar.’
‘Oh yes! you can say that now,’ said Xue Pan, ‘but it was you who started all this by
telling her about me, wasn’t it?’
‘It’s all very well to blame me for telling Mamma,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Why don’t you
blame yourself for being so careless, you great blabber-mouth ?’
‘Me careless?’ said Xue Pan. ‘What about the way Bao-yu stirs up trouble for
himself then? Let me just give you an example. Let me tell you what happened
between him and Bijou the other day. I’d met Bijou ten times, near enough, and
never had so much as a kind word out of him, yet Bao-yu, that didn’t even know him
by sight, meets him for the first time the other day, and before you know where you
are, he’s given him his sash! I hope you’re not going to say that that got about
because of me?’
His mother and sister were indignant.
‘That’s a fine example, isn’t it? It’s precisely because of that that he was beaten.
Now we know it must have been you who told.’
‘This is enough to drive a fellow mad!’ said Xue Pan, ‘It’s not so much the lies you
keep telling about me. What really gets my goat is the almighty fuss you make about
this fellow Bao-yu.’
‘Almighty fuss?’ said Bao-chai. ‘You’ve just been waving a door-bar at us, and you
say that we have been making a fuss?’
Xue Pan could see that Bao-chai had reason on her side and that she was much
harder to argue with than his mother. He was therefore eager to find something that
would stop her mouth, so that he could say what he wanted to without contradiction.
This, coupled with the fact that be was by now far too angry to weigh the seriousness
of what he was saying, was responsible for the unpardonable innuendo that
followed.
‘All right, sis,’ he said, ‘you don’t need to quarrel with me. I know what your trouble
is. Mamma told me long ago that Mr Right would be someone with a jade to match
your locket, so naturally, now you’ve seen that blasted thing that Bao-yu wears round
his neck, you do all you can to stick up for him.’
Anger at first made Bao-chai speechless; then, clinging to Aunt Xue, she burst into
tears.
‘Mamma, listen to what Pan is saying to me!’
Realizing, when he saw his sister’s tears, that he had gone too far, Xue Pan retired
sulkily to his own room and went to bed; Bao-chai was left bursting with injury and
outrage which she dared not express for fear of further upsetting her mother. She
was obliged to bid the latter a tearful goodnight and go back to her own room in the
Garden, where she spent the rest of the night weeping.
She was up early next morning. Too dispirited to make a proper toilet, she stopped
only to tidy herself a little before setting off for her mother’s. On the way she met, of
all people, Dai-yu, standing on her own beneath a flowering tree.
‘Where are you going?’ said Dai-yu.
‘To my mother’s.’ She answered without stopping.
Dai-yu noticed how dispirited she looked and saw that her eyes were swollen as if
she had been weeping.
‘Don’t make yourself ill, coz,’ she called out, almost glee?fully, to the retreating
back. ‘Even a cistern full of tears won’t heal the smart of a beating!’
The nature of Bao-chai’s reply will be revealed in the fol?lowing chapter.




CHAPTER 35

Sulky Silver tastes some lotus-leaf soup
And Golden Oriole knots a flower-patterned fringe

BAO-CHAI heard Dai-yu’s sarcasm quite clearly, but her mind was too taken up with
her own family affairs to pay much attention, and she continued on her way without
looking back.
As Dai-yu gazed towards the House of Green Delights, which was at some distance
from the flowering tree in whose shade she was standing, she presently observed Li
Wan, Ying-?chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun, attended by numerous maids, going into the
gate of its courtyard. Then, as she continued to watch, she saw them one by one
come out again and go their separate ways. It struck her that Xi-feng had not been
with them, and she wondered why.
‘It’s not like her not to visit him,’ she thought. ‘Even if she’s otherwise engaged,
you’d expect her to find some means of getting over and doing her little turn, if only
to keep in with Grandma and Auntie Wang. There must be some very press?ing
reason to keep her away.’
She lowered her head to reflect. Raising it again and looking once more in the
direction of Green Delights, she observed a colourful throng of females just about to
enter, and when she looked a little harder, she could make out Wang Xi-feng with
Grandmother Jia leaning on her arm. Lady Wang and Lady Xing walked behind them,
followed by Aunt Zhou and a large bevy of maids and women servants. As the last of
these disappeared inside the gate, Dai-yu nodded wistfully, thinking how good it
must be to have a family, and soon her face was once more wet with tears. Presently
she saw Aunt Xue and Bao-chai arrive. Not long after she had watched them enter
the gate, Nightingale suddenly walked up behind her.
‘Come and have your medicine, Miss,’ she said. ‘It’s cool enough to drink now.’
‘What’s the matter with you?’ said Dai-yu. ‘Always fussing! What does it matter to
you whether I take my medicine or not?’
Nightingale laughed good-humouredly.
‘Your cough’s only just beginning to get better, and already you want to stop taking
your medicine! It may be the fifth month and the weather may be hot, but all the
same, you still need to be careful. Come on, you’ve been standing quite long enough
in this early morning damp. You ought to come in now and rest a bit.’
Now that Nightingale’s words had recalled her attention to herself, Dai-yu became
aware that her legs were in fact rather tired. For a moment or two she appeared
rather bewildered, then, taking Nightingale’s arm, she slowly made her way back to
the Naiad’s House.
As they entered the courtyard, the chequered shadows of the bamboos and the
dew-pearled moss reminded her of two lines she had read in The Western Chamber:

             A place remote, where footsteps seldom pass,
             And dew still glistens on the untrodden grass.


‘It’s all very well,’ she thought, as she reflected oh the heroine of that play,
‘Ying-ying may have been unfortunate, but at least she had a widowed mother and a
little brother. I have no one.’
She was about to shed tears once more; but just then her parrot, which had been
perched aloft under the verandah eaves, seeing that his mistress had returned, flew
down with a sudden squawk that made her jump.
‘Wicked Polly!’ she said. ‘You’ve shaken dust all over my head!’
The parrot flew on to its perch.
‘Snowgoose!’ it called. ‘Raise the blind! Miss Lin is back!’
Dai-yu stooped in front of it and tapped its perch.
‘Did they remember your food and water, Polly?’
The parrot heaved a long sigh, uncannily like the ones that Dai-yu was wont to utter,
and recited, in its parroty voice:
             Let others laugh flower-burial to see:
             Another year who will be burying me?’

Dai-yu and Nightingale both burst out laughing.
‘It’s what you’re always reciting yourself, Miss,’ said Nightingale. ‘Fancy Polly being
able to remember it!’
Dai-yu made her take the perch down and hang it up outside the round
‘moon-window’ of her study.
Going indoors she sat down by the moon-window to take her medicine. Light
reflected from the bamboos outside passed through the gauze of the window to
make a green gloom within, lending a cold, aquarian look to the floor and the
surfaces of the furniture. To keep her spirits up in these somewhat cheerless
surroundings she spoke teasingly to the parrot hanging on the other side of the gauze
until he jumped and squawked on his perch, after which she taught him a few
snatches of her favourite poems.
At this point our narrative leaves her and returns to Bao-?chai.

*

When Bao-chai arrived at her mother’s apartment that morn?ing, she found her
mother still doing her hair. Aunt Xue greeted her daughter with a smile of surprise.
‘You’re very early this morning, my dear.’
‘I wanted to know how you were, Mamma. Did he come in again and give any more
trouble after I had left you last night?’
She sat down beside her mother and, in spite of herself, began to cry.
Aunt Xue, seeing her daughter’s tears, could not forbear shedding a few herself,
though she did her best to comfort her.
‘There, there, my child! Don’t be upset! I’ll deal with that wicked brother of yours,
you see if I don’t. I don’t want any?thing to happen to my girlie, do I? If anything
were to happen to her, I should have no one to turn to.’
Xue Pan, who had overheard, came running into the room at this point. Clasping his
hands together, he pumped them up and down, at the same time making sweeping
bows to right and left of him, in token of his contrition.
‘Forgive me, sis,’ he said. ‘I’d had too much to drink last night. I met a friend on my
way home. It was already quite late when I bumped into him, and I still hadn’t
sobered up properly when I got back here. I don’t know myself what it was I said, but
I know I must have talked a lot of silly non?sense. I’m not surprised you were angry
with me.’
The clumsiness of his apology rapidly turned Bao-chai’s weeping into laughter. Lifting
her face up from the handker?chief in which it had been buried, she made a little
grimace of derision.
‘There’s no need for you to put on this act,’ she said ‘I understand what your real
motive is perfectly well. You don’t like having us womenfolk around you and you are
looking for a means of getting rid of us, so that you can have the place here to
yourself.’
Xue Pan laughed deprecatingly.
‘I don’t know where you got that idea from, sis,’ he said. ‘It’s very unlike you to
make a snide remark like that.’
‘Snide remark?’ said Aunt Xue indignantly. ‘If that’s a “snide remark”, I don’t know
what sort of remarks you were making to your sister last night. I think you must have
taken leave of your senses!’
‘Now Mamma, don’t be angry,’ said Xue Pan, ‘and don’t you be upset, sis. Suppose I
were to tell you that from now on I’m going to give up drinking with the others
altogether, eh? What would you say to that?’
‘I’d say that you had come to your senses at last,’ said Bao?-chai.
‘And I’d say that the Heavenly Dragon had laid an egg,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘if you really
had the will-power to do it.’
‘All right then,’ said Xue Pan. ‘If you ever hear that I’ve been drinking with those
others again, sis, you can spit at me and you can call me a beast and a — and a —
worthless louse! Dammit, it’s too bad that the two of you should be worried all the
time because of me! It’s bad enough that I should make you angry, Mamma; but to
have poor little sis, too, worrying her heart out — oh, I really am a louse! I ought to
be extra good to you, Mamma, now that Father’s dead, and extra kind to sis; but
instead I make my own dear Mother angry and little sis upset. I’m not a beast, I’m
worse than a beast!’
And the great booby began to cry.
At this Aunt Xue, who had not been crying when he started, was herself becoming
upset, and Bao-chai was obliged to intervene with a brisk cheerfulness that she was
very far from feeling.
‘Haven’t you caused enough trouble already without making Mamma cry again?’
‘Who says I’ve been making Mamma cry?’ said Xue Pan, restraining his tears and
grinning back at her. ‘All right then, all right. Let’s drop the whole subject and say no
more about it. We’ll have Caltrop in and get her to pour you a nice cup of tea.’
‘I don t want any tea, thank you,’ said Bao-chai. ‘As soon as Mamma has washed, I
shall be going back into the Garden with her.’
‘Let me look at that-locket of yours,’ said Xue Pan. ‘I think it needs dipping again.’
‘Whatever for?’ said Bao-chai. ‘The gilding’s as bright as new.’
‘Isn’t it time you had a few more clothes?’ said Xue Pan.
‘Let me know what colours and what sort of patterns you want.’
‘I wouldn’t know what to do with them,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I haven’t yet worn all the
things I’ve got.’
Shortly after this exchange Aunt Xue re-emerged from changing her clothes and,
taking Bao-chai by the hand, went through into the Garden with her, leaving Xue Pan
to go off on his own.
Once in the Garden, Aunt Xue and Bao-chai made their way straight to Green
Delights. From the large number of maids and older women they found when they
got there waiting out?side on the verandah or in the ante-room inside, they knew
that Grandmother Jia and the other ladies must have arrived there before them.
They exchanged greetings with the latter on entering, after which they went over to
the couch on which Bao-yu lay, to inquire if he was feeling any better. Seeing Aunt
Xue, he attempted to raise himself a little.
‘Thank you,’ he said, ‘I am a little better. But what a lot of trouble I am causing! I
feel ashamed that you should have come over just to see me.’
Aunt Xue made him lie down again.
‘If there’s anything you want,’ she said, ‘do please let me know.’
‘I certainly shall,’ he said, ‘if I can think of anything.’
‘Is there anything you fancy to eat?’ said Lady Wang. ‘We can order it for you when
we go back presently.’
‘I can’t think of anything,’ said Bao-yu, ‘unless I did quite like that soup we had once
with the little lotus-leaves and lotus-pods in it.’
Xi-feng, who was standing by listening, gave a crow of laughter.
‘Listen to that, now! What low tastes the boy has! Whatever makes you want to eat
that leathery old stuff?’
‘Have it made, have it made!’ said Grandmother Jia vehemently. ‘Let the boy have
it by all means.’
‘Don’t be in such a hurry, Grannie!’ said Xi-feng laughing. ‘I’m trying to think who’s
got the moulds that they need for making the little shapes with.’
She turned and ordered one of the old women in attendance to go and ask the chief
cook; but though the old woman was a long time gone, she came back
empty-handed.
‘Cook says the four moulds for the soup-shapes were handed in some time ago on
your instructions.’
Xi-feng thought for a bit.
‘Yes, I remember now: I did get them back from her. But I can’t remember who I
gave them to. I should think the likeliest place for them to be is the tea-room.’
She sent someone to the tea-room stewardess; but she hadn’t got them either. In the
end they turned out to be with the plate stewardess, who looked after the gold and
silver. Aunt Xue was the first to examine them when they arrived.
There were four moulds fitted into a single box. They were made of silver, a foot or so
long and about an inch wide. Along the face of each mould were rows of very finely
cut dies, each about the size of a bean, thirty or forty on each mould. On one of the
moulds the dies were in the shape of chrysanthemums, on another of plum-flowers,
on the third of lotus pods and leaves, and on the remaining one of caltrops. Aunt Xue
turned to Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang with amusement.
‘You people really do think of everything! All these patterns for a bowl of soup! If
you hadn’t told me, I should never have guessed what these things were for.’
Xi-feng answered her before either of the older ladies could reply.
‘You wouldn’t know about these anyway, Aunt. It’s some?thing they thought up last
year for Her Grace’s visit. They cut shapes with these things out of some special
dough — I’m not sure exactly what it’s made of — and put them in a clear soup.
There’s supposed to be a suggestion of autumn lotuses in the flavour, but it doesn’t
taste very much really. It’s certainly not the sort of thing you’d want to eat very often.
In fact, I think the only time we ever had it was when they made some for the visit.
I’m surprised he can still remember.’
She handed the moulds to an attendant woman-servant.
‘Tell the kitchen to take as many chickens and other in?gredients as they’ll need to
make ten bowlfuls with. Say it’s wanted immediately.’
‘Why so much?’ said Lady Wang.
‘I have my reason,’ said Xi-feng. ‘This isn’t the sort of thing one eats every day, and
now that Cousin Bao has men?tioned it, it seems silly to make it just for him and not
let you and Grandma and Auntie Xue taste it as well. So while we are about it, we
might just as well do enough of it for everyone.’ She smiled mischievously. ‘I might
even have a taste of it myself.’
Grandmother Jia laughed.
‘Little monkey! We spoil you! Spending public money on private entertainment,
that’s what this is!’
The others all laughed. Xi-feng, quite unconcerned, joined in.
‘That’s no problem,’ she said. ‘I’m sure I can afford a little treat like this.’ She turned
to the waiting woman: ‘Tell the kitchen to use plenty of everything and charge it all
up to my account.’
The woman murmured a reply and went off to see about the order.
Bao-chai had been following these exchanges with amuse?ment.
‘Cousin Feng may be very artful,’ she said, ‘but I don’t believe that in all the years
I’ve been here I have ever seen her get the better of Lady Jia.’
‘I’m an old woman, my dear,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘What use would I have for
artfulness at my time of life? Mind you, when I was the age that Feng is now, I could
have taught her a thing or two. Still, though she may not be as sharp as I was then,
she doesn’t do so badly! A deal better than your Aunt Wang here, that’s certain. She
can’t talk to save her life, poor soul, no more than a woman of wood! She could
never get round me the way your Cousin Feng does. Fengie has the gift of a good
tongue, my dear. That’s why your old grannie is so fond of her.’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘From what you say, Grandma, it sounds as if the good talkers are the only ones you
can be fond of.’
‘Oh no,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘The silent ones have their merits, just as the good
talkers have theirs. Good talkers can be very tiresome at times and then I prefer the
silent ones.’
‘That’s all right then,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I was going to say: my sister-in-law certainly isn’t
much of talker, yet I’m sure you are as fond of her as you are of Feng. If being a good
talker were the only thing that mattered, I should have thought that Cousin Feng and
Cousin Lin would be the only two in the family you would really care about.’
‘Well now, if we’re going to start comparing,’ said Grand?mother Jia, ‘I hope your
Aunt Xue won’t think I am only saying this because she is here, but really and truly I
do think that of all the girls in this family her Bao-chai is the one that I like the best.’
Aunt Xue laughingly demurred.
‘You mustn’t say that. I’m sure you can’t really mean it.’
‘No, no, I’m sure she does,’ Lady Wang hurriedly interposed. ‘I’ve often heard
Mother speak well of Bao-chai when you weren’t around.’
Bao-yu’s contribution to the conversation had been made with the intention of
encouraging Grandmother Jia to say something nice about Dai-yu. It came to him as a
surprise when she started praising Bao-chai instead. He looked at Bao?-chai and
grinned; but she turned quickly away and began talk?ing to Aroma.
Just then a servant came to say that lunch over at the man?sion was ready, and
Grandmother Jia rose to go. Having first exhorted Bao-yu to ‘hurry up and get better’
and then ad?monished his maids, she began to move out of the room not without a
polite attempt to make Aunt Xue go out ahead of her - leaning on Xi-feng’s arm.
‘Is that soup ready yet?’ she inquired when they were out of the room. Then,
turning to Aunt Xue, she asked her if there was anything she particularly fancied for
her lunch.
‘Mind you let me know if there is,’ she said. ‘I have the power to make Fengie treat
us to it.’
Aunt Xue laughed.
‘You shouldn’t tease the poor girl! She’s always getting nice things for you. But
you’re not much of an eater at the best of times.’
‘Don’t you believe it, Aunt!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Grannie knows how to tuck in. She’d have
eaten me by now if she weren’t afraid that she’d find me a bit too vinegary.’
This set them all off laughing. Even Bao-yu, in the inner room, had to join in, though
it hurt him to do so. Aroma, standing beside him, was helpless with mirth.
‘Mrs Lian really is a caution!’
Bao-yu took her hand and drew her down beside him.
‘Come!’ he said. ‘You must be tired. You’ve been on your feet for hours.’
‘Hey, you’ve forgotten!’ said Aroma. ‘While Miss Bao’s still in the courtyard, you
ought to ask her if she’ll let Oriole come over to do that knotting for you.’
‘Yes,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m glad you reminded me.’ He raised his head and shouted
towards the window.
‘Cousin Bao! If you can spare her, after you’ve had your lunch, would you mind
sending Oriole here to do some knotting for me?’
‘Yes, certainly,’ said Bao-chai, turning back to reply. ‘I’ll send her over presently.’
Grandmother Jia and the others had stopped to listen. Not having heard properly, the
old lady asked what it was, Bao?-chai explained.
‘Oh do, my dear!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Do let him have her to do the knotting I If
you need someone in her place, I have plenty of free hands in my apartment. Just
pick whichever of my maids you like to wait on you.’
Aunt Xue and Bao-chai were amused.
‘Let her go to him by all means,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘but there certainly won’t be any
need of a stand-in. She has little enough to do but get up to mischief as it is.’
They had been walking on as they talked and presently came upon Xiang-yun,
Patience and Caltrop picking balsams beside an artificial ‘mountain’ of rock. Seeing
Grandmother Jia and the rest coming, they left off their flower gathering and came
forward to join them.
Soon the little party emerged from the Garden. Fearing that Grandmother Jia might
be fatigued, Lady Wang proposed that she should stop on the way back and sit down
for a while in her apartment. The old lady’s feet were indeed beginning to trouble
her and she nodded in consent. Lady Wang sent a maid on ahead to prepare for her
arrival.
Aunt Zhao was prudently avoiding Lady Wang for the time being by feigning sick, so
of the two concubines it was only Aunt Zhou who came out with the old
women-servants and maids of the apartment to welcome Grandmother Jia, holding
up the door blind for her to enter and arranging the pillows and back-rest for her on
the kang.
Moving up to it on Xi-feng’s arm, the old lady installed herself on the right-hand side
at the back with Aunt Xue in the guest’s position beside her. Bao-chai and Xiang-yun
sat nearer the edge of the kang on either side. Lady Wang served Grand?mother Jia
with tea, holding the cup ceremoniously in both her hands, and Li Wan in like
manner offered tea to Aunt Xue.
‘Let the younger women wait on us,’ said Grandmother Jia to Lady Wang. ‘You sit
down over there so that we can talk to you.’
Lady Wang obediently took a seat on a stool-chair beside the kang. She instructed
Xi-feng to be her deputy.
‘You can tell them to serve Grandmother’s lunch in here,’ she said to Xi-feng. ‘You
had better get them to add a dish or two.’
Having said that she would, Xi-feng went outside and in?structed a servant to take
word round to Grandmother Jia’s apartment. The old women there passed on the
message in their turn, and soon a reinforcement of maids were hurrying on their way
to Lady Wang’s.
Lady Wang next gave instructions that the rest of the girls should be invited; but after
a long wait only Tan-chun and Xi-chun turned up. Ying-chun was unwell and did not
feel like eating. Dai-yu abstained so frequently — eating perhaps no more than five
meals in every ten — that her absence on this occasion was scarcely noticed.
Soon lunch arrived and the servants brought up a low table and set it down on the
kang. Xi-feng stood on the floor below, a bundle of ivory chopsticks wrapped up in a
tea-towel in her hand.
‘Now, Grannie and Auntie,’ she said, ‘I hope you are going to do as you’re told and
not stand on ceremony!’
Grandmother Jia looked at Aunt Xue and smiled.
‘Shall we do as she says and stay put?’
‘Yes, certainly,’ said Aunt Xue, smiling back, whereupon Xi-feng proceeded to lay for
them where they sat: two pairs of chopsticks on the far side for Grandmother Jia and
Aunt Xue, one pair at either end for Bao-chai and Xiang-yun. Lady Wang and Li Wan
stood on the floor below and supervised the serv?ing of the dishes, while Xi-feng
called for a set of clean things for one more person and went, chopsticks in hand,
from dish to dish, making a selection from them for Bao-yu.
A few minutes later the lotus-leaf soup arrived and was presented to Grandmother
Jia for her inspection. Lady Wang, glancing quickly round her, noticed Silver standing
near at hand and ordered her to carry a bowl of it to Bao-yu together with the other
things that Xi-feng had just put out for him; but Xi-feng objected that there was too
much for one person to carry. Just then Oriole and Providence chanced to enter, and
Bao-chai, knowing that they had already had their lunch, suggested that Oriole
should help with the carrying.
‘Master Bao has been asking if you could go over there to do some knotting for
him,’ she told Oriole, ‘You might as well go with her and do it now.’
‘Yes, Miss,’ said Oriole, and went off with Silver, carrying her share of the bowls.
‘They’re terribly hot,’ she said, when they were alone together. ‘How are we going
to carry them so far?’
‘Don’t worry!’ said Silver, ‘I know just the answer.’
She made one of the old women fetch a covered lacquer carrying-box. The bowls of
soup, rice and so forth fitted into it easily. She told the old woman to follow them.
She and Oriole then sauntered along empty-handed in the direction of Green
Delights, while the old woman trotted along behind them carrying everything. When
they reached the gate of the courtyard, Silver took the box from her and the two girls
went on into the house alone.
They found Aroma, Musk and Ripple in the inner room, enjoying a joke with Bao-yu.
The three of them got up, still laughing, when they saw Silver and Oriole enter, and
Aroma, supposing that they had come from their respective apart?ments, remarked,
as she relieved Silver of the box, on the coincidence of their arriving simultaneously.
Having handed over the box, Silver plumped herself down on a stool-chair; but Oriole
was less bold; and even when Aroma offered her a foot-stool to sit on, she still
refused to be seated.
Bao-yu was naturally very pleased to see Oriole; but the sight of Silver, reminding him,
with a pang of mingled shame and sorrow, of her sister Golden, impelled him to
ignore Oriole and concentrate his attention on the other girl. Aroma noticed this
neglect and was afraid that Oriole might be offended. Partly for this reason and
partly because Oriole looked so uncomfortable standing up, but was evidently
determined not to sit down in Bao-yu’s presence, she took her by the hand and drew
her into the adjoining room for a cup of tea and a chat.
Meanwhile in the inner room Musk and Ripple had laid out the bowls and chopsticks
and were waiting in readiness to serve Bao-yu his lunch; but Bao-yu was still
occupied with Silver and seemed in no hurry to begin.
‘How is your mother?’ he asked her.
The girl sat silent, with a sullen, angry look on her face. When, with a muttered ‘all
right’, she did at last answer him, she averted her eyes and would not look at him.
Bao-yu was very much put out, but did his best to be pleasant.
‘Who told you to bring this for me?’
‘Her Ladyship and Mrs Lian. Who do you think?’
Bao-yu could see the misery in her face and knew that it was because of Golden that
she looked like that. He wished he could humble himself before her, but the presence
of the other maids inhibited him. He had to think of some way of getting rid of them.
Having succeeded at last in doing so, he began, as soon as they were out of the room,
to exercise all his charm upon Silver. At first she tried to ignore the questions with
which he plied her; but he was so patient and persistent, meet?ing her unyielding
stiffness with such warmth and gentleness, that in the end her heart misgave her and
a faintly pleased expression began to steal over her face. Bao-yu judged the time ripe
to entreat her smilingly for his lunch.
‘Fetch me that soup will you, there’s a dear. I’d like to try it now.’
‘I can’t feed other people,’ said Silver. ‘I never could. You’ll have to wait till the
others come back.’
‘I’m not asking you to feed me,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m just asking you to get it for me
because I can’t walk. Once you’ve done that you can go back and tell them you’ve
finished your errand and get on with your own lunch. I don’t want to keep you from
your food: you’re probably starving. However, if you don’t even feel up to passing me
a bowl of soup, I’ll just have to put up with the pain and get it myself.’
He tried to rise from his bed, but the effort cost him a cry of pain. Unable to hold out
any longer when she saw the state he was in, Silver jumped to her feet.
‘All right. Lie down, lie down!’ she said. ‘ “Past sin, present suffering.” You’ve got
your retribution without having to wait for it, so you needn’t expect me to feel sorry
for you!’
She broke into a sudden peal of laughter and fetched him the soup.
‘Silver dear,’ said Bao-yu, ‘if you still feel angry with me, get it over with now. Try to
look pleasanter when you are with Their Ladyships. You mustn’t look angry all the
time when you are with them, or you’ll be getting yourself into trouble.’
‘Go on, get on with your soup!’ said Silver. ‘Keep the sugary stuff for other people. I
know all about it!’
Bao-yu drank a couple of mouthfuls of the soup at her in?sistence, but artfully
pretended not to like it.
‘It doesn’t taste nice.’
‘Doesn’t taste nice?’ said Silver with an expression of extreme disgust. ‘Holy Name!
if that doesn’t taste nice, I’d like to know what does!’
‘It’s got no flavour,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Taste it yourself, if you don’t believe me.’
Silver to prove him wrong indignantly raised the spoon to her lips and tasted.
Bao-yu laughed.
‘Ah, now it’ll taste all right!’
Silver realized that he had deliberately tricked her into drinking from the same bowl.
‘You wouldn’t drink it a moment ago,’ she said, ‘so now you shan’t have any even if
you say you want it.’
And though Bao-yu laughingly begged and pleaded, she refused to let him have it
back and called in the other maids to give him the rest of his meal no sooner had
they come in, however, than it was announced that ‘two old nannies from Mr Fu’s’
had arrived ‘to call on Master Bao’.
Bao-yu knew that the ‘Mr Fu’ referred to must be one Fu Shi, an Assistant
Sub-Prefect who had started life as one of Jia Zheng’s protégé’s and made his way up
in the world largely by trading on Jia Zheng’s reputation. Jia Zheng thought highly of
him, regarding him as the brightest of the various young fellows he had patronized,
and Fu Shi for his part was assiduous in sending message and compliments to the
man?sion in order to keep up the connection.
Now if there were two sorts of people Bao-yu could not at any rice abide they were
stupid old women and pushing young men. It may therefore seem strange that these
two old nannies sent by the egregious Fu Shi should have been ac?corded instant
admission to his sickroom. The reason was that Bao-yu’ had heard that Fu Shi had a
younger sister called Fu Qiu-fang, who, though

        a virgin-pearl, still chambered from men’s sight,

was commonly said to be both beautiful and talented. Bao-yu had not actually seen
her; hut he had formed a picture of her in his imagination and worshipped her from
afar. And since to have refused entry to the two old women would have been in his
eyes tantamount to offering Qiu-fang an affront, he at once gave orders for them to
be admitted.
Qiu-fang was, as a matter of fact, a girl of passable good looks and more than average
intelligence. Her brother had entertained hopes of trading on these assets in order to
ally himself matrimonially with some powerful or aristocratic family — an ambition
which had hitherto led him to look frowningly on lesser offers, with the result that, at
the relatively great age of twenty-two, Qiu-fang remained unbetrothed. For the fact
of the matter was that the powerful and aristocratic families with whom he sought
alliance looked on Fu Shi as an impoverished pen-pusher deficient in both breeding
and refinement and showed not the slightest inclination to want his sister as a
daughter-in-law. However, Fu Shi went on cultivating his intimacy with the Jia family
and was still not without hopes of realizing his ambition in that direction.
It so happened that the two old nannies sent to see Bao-yu on this occasion were
exceptionally ignorant old women. Hearing that they were to be admitted, they came
into the room, delivered themselves of the sentence or two it took to inquire after
his health, and thereafter lapsed into a stupid silence.
With the arrival of strangers, Silver had been obliged to drop the bantering tone she
had begun to adopt with Bao-yu and stood, holding the soup-bowl in both her hands,
listening in silence. It was left to Bao-yu to make what conversation he could with the
women as he continued to eat his lunch. While so engaged, he reached out a hand
for the soup, and Silver reciprocated mechanically; but as both of them had their
eyes on the visitors, their uncoordinated movements resulted in a brief collision. The
bowl was upset and hot soup spilled over Bao-yu’s hand. Silver, startled, though
herself unhurt, gave a nervous laugh.
‘Now look what you’ve done!’
The other maids rushed forward to retrieve the bowl. Bao-yu, insensitive to his own
pain, inquired anxiously after Silver.
‘Where did you scald yourself? Does it hurt?’
Silver and the rest all laughed.
‘You’re the one who’s been scalded,’ said Silver. ‘Why ask me?’
Only then did Bao-yu become conscious that his own hand had been burned. The
maids hurriedly mopped up. Not wishing to continue his meal after this, he washed
his hands, drank some tea, and spoke a little longer with the old women, who then
took their leave and were seen through the Garden as far as the bridge by Skybright
and some of the other maids.
When they found themselves alone, ‘the two old women began discussing the visit
with each other as they went along.
‘Well, I’ve heard people say that this Bao-yu is like a bad fruit - good to look at but
rotten inside,’ said one of them, ‘and I must say I’m not surprised. He certainly does
seem a bit simple. Fancy scalding his own hand and then asking someone else where
it hurt! He must be a simpleton! Heh! heh! heh!’
‘He really and truly is a bit simple,’ said the other one. ‘A number of them told me
about it when I came here last. Once when he was out in the pouring rain and
himself as wet as a drowned chicken, he says to someone, “It’s raining,” he says, “run
inside and get out of the rain.” What a laugh! Heh! heh! heh! And he often cries or
laughs when no one else is by. They say that when he sees a swallow he talks to the
swallow, and when he sees a fish in the river he talks to the fish, and when he sees
the stars or the moon, he sighs and groans and mutters away to himself like a crazy
thing. And he’s as soft as a baby. Even the little maids can do what they like with him.
If he’s in the mood for saving, he’ll make a fuss over a piece of thread; but other
times they an smash things worth a fortune and he won’t mind a bit.’
Still talking, they passed out of the gate of the Garden, at which point our narrative
leaves them.
*

Back at Green Delights, Aroma, seeing that the others had now gone, led Oriole into
Bao-yu’s room to ask what it was that he wanted done. Bao-yu gave Oriole a smile.
‘I’m sorry, I was busy talking just now,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid I neglected you. The
reason I’ve dragged you here is because I want you to do some knotting for me.’
‘What’s it for?’ said Oriole.
‘Never mind that,’ said Bao-yu airily. ‘Do me some of every kind.’
Oriole clapped her hands and laughed.
‘Goodness me! That would take me about ten year!’
‘My dear young lady,’ said Bao-yu pleasantly, ‘you have all the time in the world at
your disposal. I’m sure you could manage in less time than that.’
‘Not in one sitting, at all events,’ said Aroma. ‘Better choose two or three of the
main types and let her do one of each.’
‘If you’re talking about types,’ said Oriole, ‘there are really only three: fan tassels,
rosary-nets and net-and-tassel fringes for sashes.’
‘All right,’ said Bao-yu, ‘a sash-fringe.’
‘What colour’s the sash?’ said Oriole.
‘Crimson.’
‘Black or navy-blue would go well with crimson,’ said Oriole. ‘With anything lighter
the crimson would be too overpowering.’
‘What goes with viridian?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Peach pink.’
‘Mm. That sounds very colourful, certainly. What about something colourful but a
bit more on the quiet side?’
‘What about leek-green and greenish-yellow?’ said Oriole. ‘That’s a very tasteful
combination.’
‘All right, you make me those three then one black, one peach-pink and one
leek-green.’
‘What pattern do you want for the netting?’ said Oriole.
‘What patterns are there?’ said Bao-yu.
‘There’s stick-pattern, ladder-pattern, diamond, double diamond, linked rings,
flower-pattern, willow-leaf...’
‘What was the pattern of that netting you did the other day for Tan-chun?’
‘Ah, that was a flower-pattern with filled-in centres.’
‘I’d like it in that pattern.’
Aroma had meanwhile left them to fetch the silks. As she came back with them, an
old woman called through the win?dow to say that her lunch was ready.
‘Off with you then,’ said Bao-yu, ‘and come back as soon as you have finished.’
‘How can I possibly leave with a guest here in the room said Aroma.
‘Don’t be ridiculous! ’ said Oriole. ‘You go and have your lunch.’
Aroma smiled at that and tripped off, leaving the two of them alone together, except
for two very junior maids who were to remain at hand in case they were wanted.
Bao-yu lay and watched Oriole knotting, chatting to her in a desultory way as he
watched.
‘How old are you?’ he asked her.
Oriole replied without raising her head from her work.
‘Fourteen.’
‘What’s your surname?’
‘Huang.’
‘Huang? That means “yellow”. It goes well with your name. They say “yellow oriole”,
don’t they? — “yellow oriole”, “golden oriole”.’
‘My name was “Golden Oriole” originally,’ said Oriole, ‘but Miss Bao found it too
much of a mouthful, so she called me just “Oriole” for short, and now everyone else
does.’
‘Miss Bao must be very fond of you,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I expect later on when she gets
married she’ll want to take you with her.’
Oriole pulled a face and laughed.
‘I’ve often said to Aroma,’ Bao-yu went on, ‘whoever gets you and your mistress
will be a lucky man.’
‘She’s a good person, is our Miss Bao,’ said Oriole, ‘much more than you realize.
There are things about her you don’t find in many people in this world — more
important things than good looks — though she’s good-looking too, of course.’
Oriole’s mellifluous, lilting voice and the simple, artless way in which she talked and
laughed had powerfully affected Bao-yu. It increased his pleasure to hear her
speaking in this way now about her mistress.
‘What things?’ he asked her eagerly. ‘Tell me about them.’
‘If I do,’ said Oriole, ‘you mustn’t let her know that I to you.’
‘Of course not.’
They were interrupted at this point by a voice from the outer room.
‘You’re very quiet in there!’
As the two of them simultaneously turned to look, it was Bao-chai herself who
stepped into the room. Bao-yu at once invited her to take a seat. When she had done
so, she inquired what Oriole was making and leaned forward to inspect it. The first of
the three sash-ends was already half completed.
‘What do you want to make a thing like that for?’ she asked. ‘Why don’t you make
him a necklet to wear with his jade?’
Bao-yu clapped his hands delightedly. He had intended to ask Oriole to do this for
him in the first place, but had for?gotten.
‘Clever coz! What a good thing you mentioned it! I’d quite forgotten. But what
would be the right colour for it?’
‘Let’s see,’ said Bao-chai. ‘The brighter colours definitely wouldn’t do. Crimson
would clash. Yellow wouldn’t be a sufficient contrast. Black would be too heavy. I’ll
tell you what. If you were to take a gold thread and a very fine black bugle-thread
and twist them together — that would look nice.’
Bao-yu was delighted with the suggestion, and shouted several times for Aroma to
fetch the gold thread. She came in while he was still shouting for her, carrying two
plates of food and looking puzzled.
‘I can’t understand it,’ she said. ‘Someone’s just brought me these from Her
Ladyship.’
‘Oh, I expect they had more than they wanted there, so she’s sent you this to share
with the others,’ said Bao-yu.
‘No,’ said Aroma. ‘They said it was for me personally; but I’m not to go over and
kotow for it. I don’t know what to make of it.’
Bao-chai laughed.
‘If it’s for you to eat, I should go ahead and eat it! Never mind the whys and
wherefores!’
‘But it never happened before,’ said Aroma. ‘I feel so embarrassed.’
Bao-chai’s lips puckered up mockingly.
‘Embarrassed? Before very long you’re going to have much more than this to feel
embarrassed about!’
Aroma sensed something behind this remark. She knew Bao-chai too well to suppose
that any such remark of hers would be made triflingly. Remembering what Lady
Wang had seemed to hint at in her interview of the previous day, she dropped the
subject.
‘I’ll have these now then,’ she said, holding the dishes out for Bao-yu to inspect,
‘and as soon as I’ve washed, I shall bring you your gold thread.’
With that she hurried out again.
When she returned later, after having lunched and washed her hands, bringing the
gold thread for Oriole’s knotting, Bao-chai was no longer there, since she had been
called away by Xue Pan’s messenger.
Bao-yu once more lay back and watched Oriole knotting; but soon they were
interrupted once more, this time by a couple of maids from Lady Xing’s. They brought
two sorts of fruit and a message for him from their mistress.
‘Her Ladyship says are you able to walk? She says if you are, she’d like you to come
over some time and amuse your?self. She says tell him I’m thinking of him.’
‘Tell her,’ Bao-yu replied politely, ‘that as soon as I can walk, I shall certainly be
round to pay my respects. Tell her that the pain is a little better than it was and that
she is not to worry.’
Asking the two girls to be seated, he called Ripple to him and asked her to take half of
the fruit they had brought and offer it to Dai-yu; but just as she was about to go,
Dai-yu could be heard talking in the courtyard. He told Ripple to hurry outside and
invite her in.
For further details, please consult the following chapter.




CHAPTER 36

Bao-chai visits Green Delights and hears strange words from
a sleeper
Bao-yu visits Pear-tree Court and learns hard facts from
a performer
WHEN Grandmother Jia got back to her own apartment after lunching with Lady
Wang, she was naturally very pleased to have seen Bao-yu making such rapid
progress; but her pleasure soon gave way to worry when she began wondering what
would happen when he was well enough for Jia Zheng to start asking for him again.
To guard against that contin?gency she had Jia Zheng’s Head Boy brought before her
to receive instructions direct from her own mouth.
‘In future,’ she told him, ‘whenever the Master is entertain?ing guests or seeing
anybody and asks for Bao-yu, you are to say, straight away, without needing to see
me about it, first of all that Master Bao was very seriously injured by his beating and
will need several months’ complete rest before he can walk properly; and secondly
that he has just made an offering to his star-guardian because of an unlucky
conjunction in his horo?scope and isn’t allowed to see outsiders or go outside the
inner gate until the beginning of the eighth month.’
She called Nannie Li and Aroma to her as soon as the Head Boy had gone and
instructed them to tell Bao-yu this, so that no worries should retard the progress of
his recovery.
Bao-yu had always hated meeting or making conversation with senior males of the
scholar-official class and detested all occasions which involved dressing up, such as
visits of congratulation and condolence and the various other formal ex?changes to
which members of that class devote so great a part of their time. His grandmother’s
dispensation was therefore particularly gratifying to him, and he used it as an excuse
for cutting himself off from all contact with visiting relations and friends. He even
pleased himself about whether or not he made the customary morning and evening
duty-calls on the senior members of the household. Each day was spent playing or
resting in the Garden, and during the whole of the day, except for the brief period in
the early morning when he went outside to visit his mother and grandmother, he
was the will?ing captive of his maids and did for them whatever little ser?vices it
pleased them to command. In such enjoyable indolence several weeks slipped
agreeably by. From time to time, as opportunity presented itself, someone like
Bao-chai would attempt to remonstrate with him; but her remonstrances would be
indignantly rejected.
‘Why should a pure, sweet girl like you want to go imitating that ghastly crew of
thievish, place-hunting career worms,’ he would say, ‘bothering her head about
“fame” and “reputa?tion” and all that sort of rubbish? All these notions you are
parroting were dreamed up by meddlesome old men in days gone by for the express
purpose of leading astray the whis?kered idiots who came after them. I really think
it’s too bad that I should have to live in an age when the minds of nice, sensible girls
are contaminated by such idiocies. It’s a tank abuse of the intellectual gifts that you
were born with!’
Hearing him talk so wildly, the remonstrators concluded that he was slightly mad,
and eventually gave up trying to be serious with him. The exception was Dai-yu, who,
ever since they were little children together, had never once spoken to him about the
need to ‘get on in the world’ or ‘make a name for oneself’. This was one of the
reasons why he so much respected her.

*

But to return to our narrative.
Some time after Golden’s death, Xi-feng began receiving presents and courtesy calls
from various senior members of the domestic staff. Though she could not for the
moment guess what lay behind these flattering attentions, her sus?picions were
aroused, and one day, in the course of which she had once more received presents
from these people, she laugh?ingly questioned Patience on the subject when they
were alone together in the evening.
‘I’m surprised you haven’t guessed that!’ said Patience a little scornfully. ‘I think, if
you were to look into it, you’d find that all of these people had daughters working for
Her Lady?ship. There are four senior maids on Her Ladyship’s establish?ment who
each get one tael a month, the rest only get a few hundred cash each; and now that
Golden’s dead, one of the tael-a-month places is vacant. I expect these people are
trying to get it for their own daughters.’
‘Of course!’ said Xi-feng, much amused. ‘Of course! I’m sure you are right. Well, I do
think it rather greedy of them. They earn quite good money as it is, they don’t have
any really hard work to do, and they’ve got daughters to bring them in a little extra
income. I think for them to want to get this plum for themselves as well is really a bit
too much. I wouldn’t have thought they could afford to keep sending me presents
like this. Still, that’s their concern! If they want to go on giving me presents, I shall go
on taking them. But I shall still do what I was going to do anyway. It won’t make any
difference to me.’
In pursuance of this policy she kept the servants waiting for a decision and watched
the presents accumulate; then, when no more seemed to be forthcoming, she
availed herself of the first opportunity to raise the matter with Lady Wang. This
occurred one day about noon when Aunt Xue, Bao-chai and Dai-yu were in Lady
Wang’s apartment sharing a water-melon with her. Xi-feng tackled Lady Wang while
they sat eating the melon.
‘You’ve been short of a maid, Aunt, since Silver’s sister died,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Have you
anyone in mind to replace her with? You might let us know if you have, so that we
know what to do with next month’s allowance.’
Lady Wang thought for a bit.
‘Do I have to have four maids or five maids or whatever it is?’ she asked. ‘It seems
to me that if the maids I’ve got are adequate, I might as well do without the other
one.’
Xi-feng smiled.
‘In principle, of course, you are right, Aunt; but we have got fixed rules about these
things, and when some people at the bottom of the scale are making a great fuss
about keeping their number up, it wouldn’t do to have you cutting yours down. In
any case, the saving would only be one tael a month: it would hardly be worth
making.’
Lady Wang again reflected for some moments.
‘Very well,’ she said at last, you can go on paying the allowance as before, but you
needn’t find me another maid. Silver shall have it. Her sister gave me a lot of service
before she was so unfortunate, poor child. I don’t think it would be excessive to give
Silver a double allowance, for her sister’s sake.’
After promising to see that this was done, Xi-feng turned smilingly to Silver and
congratulated her. Silver hurried for?ward and kotowed in gratitude to Lady Wang.
‘That reminds me,’ said Lady Wang: ‘what allowance do Aunt Zhao and Aunt Zhou
get each month?’
‘The fixed amount is two taels each a month,’ said Xi-feng, but Aunt Zhao gets an
additional two taels for Huan, so she really gets four taels. Then on top of that they
each get two strings of cash a month for their maids.’
‘Do they get the full amount every month?’ said Lady Wang.
Xi-feng was somewhat taken aback.
‘Of course. Why not?’ she replied, a trifle sharply.
‘It’s just that I thought I heard someone the other day com?plaining that they were
a string of cash short,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I wonder how that could have happened?’
Xi-feng smiled disarmingly.
‘The allowance for Aunt Zhao’s and Aunt Zhou’s maids used to be one string each a
month, but last year Accounts reduced it by a half to five hundred cash. Aunt Zhao
and Aunt Zhou are allowed two maids each, so that means they now get one string a
month less than they used to. This is something completely outside my control. I’d be
only too happy to pay them more if I could, but the cut was made by Accounts, and
all I can do is to hand out what I am given. It’s not my de?cision. In fact, I’ve raised
the matter once or twice with them and told them they ought to go back to the
original payment, but all they’ll say is that that’s what’s been decided and nothing
can be done about it. Actually, now that I do the paying, people do at least get their
allowances on time. In the old days, when Accounts made the payments direct, we
were always having trouble. Never a month went by without some one getting into
debt because they hadn’t been paid on time.’ Another silence followed in which Lady
Wang was evi?dently thinking.
‘How many of Lady Jia’s maids get one tael a month?’ she asked eventually.
‘Seven—well, eight really, if you count Aroma.’
‘Yes, I see,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Bao-yu wouldn’t have any tael-a-month maids of his
own, of course. Aroma still counts as one of Lady Jia’s maids.’
‘Oh yes. Aroma is still Grandma’s maid,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Grandma lets Bao-yu employ
her, but her pay still comes out of Grandma’s allowance. It would be quite out of the
question to cut her pay simply because she’s working for Bao-yu. If you wanted to do
that, you’d first have to find another maid for Grandma. And even then, of course, if
you wanted her to be paid as a member of Bao-yu’s establishment, to make it fair
you’d really need to give Huan another maid, too. Incidentally, the fact that Bao-yu’s
senior maids like Skybright and Musk get a string of cash a month and the juniors like
Melilot five hundred is due to Grandma’s own personal instructions; so I don’t think
anyone is really in a position to make a fuss about that.’
Aunt Xue laughed.
‘Listening to Feng is like listening to a load of walnuts being emptied out of a cart -
all those facts and figures! And everything accounted for — everything just and fair!’
‘I trust none of the facts and figures were wrong, Aunt,’ said Xi-feng.
‘No, no, nothing wrong with the facts and figures,’ said Aunt Xue pleasantly. ‘It’s
just that you would save yourself some energy by taking them a little more slowly.’
Xi-feng seemed about to laugh, but checked herself to hear what her other aunt had
to say. Lady Wang, however, de?liberated for some little while longer before making
her pro?nouncement.
‘Find someone to wait on Lady Jia in place of Aroma,’ she said eventually, ‘and stop
paying Aroma out of Lady Jia’s allowance. Instead you can pay her two taels and a
string of cash a month out of my personal allowance of twenty taels. And in future,
whatever arrangements are made about Aunt Zhao’s and Aunt Zhou’s allowances, I
want you to pay Aroma at exactly the same rate only whatever it is, it’s all to come
out of my personal allowance. I don’t want Accounts getting mixed up in this.’
Having promised to carry out these instructions, Xi-feng turned to Aunt Xue and
nudged her playfully.
‘There you are! What did I tell you? It’s turned out exactly as I said.’
‘And so it should,’ said Aunt Xue warmly. ‘It should have been done long ago. She’s
a lovely girl — and it isn’t only her looks I’m referring to, either. She has such a
generous, open way of doing things, and she is so polite and friendly to talk to.
There’s a strong little will there, though — plenty of deter?mination underneath it
all. Oh, I think she’s a real treasure.’
‘She is a dear, good child,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I don’t think the rest of you realize just
how good she is. Ten times better than my Bao-yu, that’s quite certain. If Bao-yu can
keep her with him always, he’ll he a very lucky boy.’
‘If you think that, Aunt,’ said Xi-feng, ‘why not have her plucked and painted and
make her his chamber-wife openly?’
‘No, it wouldn’t do,’ said Lady Wang. ‘First of all he is too young; secondly Sir Zheng
would never agree to it; and in the third place, even if we allow a certain amount of
freedom between them, as long as he still thinks of her as his maid, there is some
chance that he will listen to what she says, but once we make her his chamber-wife,
she will feel less free to tell him what she thinks of him when he is being silly. No, I
think for the moment at any rate we should leave it a little vague. We can make a
more definite arrangement in two or three years’ time.’
After pausing long enough to ascertain that Lady Wang had nothing more to say,
Xi-feng turned and went. A group of stewards’ wives were waiting for her under the
eaves in the narrow alley-way at the back to report to her on various household
matters. They smiled at her as she emerged, and one of them chaffed her about the
length of her visit.
‘You’ve been a long time today, Madam. What can you have been talking about to
keep you so long? I hope you haven’t overheated yourself with so much talking!’
Xi-feng stood in the doorway in a very unladylike attitude, one foot on the threshold,
rolling her sleeves back and smiling at no one in particular.
‘There’s a nice little draught out here. I think I’ll stand here for a bit and cool off.’
She turned to the women.
‘Did you say I’ve been a long time? It’s hardly surprising. Today Her Ladyship has
been asking about just about every?thing that’s happened here during the past two
hundred years.’ Her voice lost its jocular tone and became suddenly harsher. ‘From
now on if I ever feel like doing something really spite?ful, I shall do it. Let her
complain to Her Ladyship if she has a mind to, I don’t care. Stupid woman! Stupid,
chicken-witted, evil-tongued, snivelling, misbegotten whore! She ought to wake up.
One of these days they’ll make a dean sweep and take the whole lot away — then
she’ll have something to shout about! Complain about me, would she, because her
maid’s allowance has been cut? Who the Holy Name does she think she is? She’s only
a bit of bought goods herself. What’s the likes of her doing with maids to wait on her
any way?’
Leaving the stewardesses to make what they would of this explosion, she strode off
to look for someone suitable to take a message in to Grandmother Jia.
At which point we leave her.

*

After Aunt Xue and the two girls had finished their water?melon, they sat talking for
a few minutes longer with Lady Wang before leaving, Aunt Xue to return to her own
apart?ment, Bao-chai and Dai-yu to go back into the Garden. Bao?-chai invited
Dai-yu to accompany her to the Lotus Pavilion to pay a call on Xi-chun, but Dai-yu
said she was going to have a bath, and presently parted company with Bao-chai,
leaving her to continue on her way there alone. Bao-chai’s route took her past the
House of Green Delights, and as she drew near it, she thought she would call in to
chat for a while with Bao-yu and help him to dispel the sleepiness of the early
afternoon.
The courtyard was silent as she entered it. Not a bird’s cheep was to be heard. Even
the storks were asleep, hunched up in the shadow of the plantains. Keeping to the
relative cool?ness of the covered walk, she made her way round to the house. In the
outer room maids were lying about in all directions asleep. Slipping behind the tall
mirror and through the elaborately carved partition, she passed into the inner room
where Bao-yu lay inside his protective summer ‘cabinet’ of net. He, too, was fast
asleep. Aroma sat at his bedside sewing, a white horse-hair fly-whisk with a handle of
white rhinoceros-horn at her side. Bao-chai entered the ‘cabinet’ and laughed softly
at Aroma.
‘Aren’t you being rather over-cautious?’ she whispered. ‘What’s the fly-whisk for?
Surely no flies or mosquitoes can get in here?’
Aroma looked up, startled, hurriedly put down her sewing, and rose to her feet.
‘Oh, it’s Miss Bao! I wasn’t expecting you,’ she whispered. ‘You gave me quite a
shock - no, we don’t get any flies or mosquitoes in here, but there’s a little tiny insect
that finds its way through the holes in the netting. They’re so small, you don’t notice
them; but when you’re asleep they can give you a nasty bite - a bit like an ant-bite.’
‘That’s not surprising,’ said Bao-chai. ‘You’ve got water behind you here, you see;
you’ve also got a lot of sweet?-smelling flowers outside; and indoors is perfumed as
well. This kind of insect breeds in the insides of flowers and is attracted towards
anything fragrant. That’s why you get them inside the house.’
While she was speaking, her eye fell on the sewing that Aroma had just put down. It
was a pinafore of the kind children wear, with bib and apron in one. It was of white
satin lined with red silk, and the pattern Aroma was em?broidering on it was one of
mandarin ducks disporting themselves in a background of lotuses. The ducks were in
rainbow colours, and the lotuses had red flowers and green leaves.
‘Goodness, how beautiful!’ she exclaimed. ‘Who’s it for? It must be someone very
special, to deserve work as fine as this.’
Aroma turned her head and shot her lips out in the direction of the figure sleeping on
the bed.
‘Him? He’s too big to wear that sort of thing, surely?’
‘He wouldn’t wear them to start with. That’s why I try to make them so nicely—so
that when he sees them he can’t resist putting them on. I try to get him to wear
them in this hot weather, so that if he uncovers himself in his sleep, there’s no risk of
his getting chilled. If you think there’s a1ot of work in this one, you ought to see the
one he’s wearing!’
‘I wonder you can have the patience,’ said Bao-chai.
‘I’ve done such a lot of work on it today,’ said Aroma, ‘my neck is quite stiff from
bending over.’ She smiled at Bao-chai entreatingly: ‘Do us a favour, Miss: sit here a bit
in my place, will you, while I go off and stretch my legs? I’ll be back directly.’
Saying this, she slipped quietly out, not waiting for a reply. So intent was Bao-chai on
the embroidery that she sank down almost without realizing what she was doing into
the place that Aroma had just vacated. It really was a most beauti?ful piece of work;
in fact, she found it irresistible, and taking up the needle, began sewing it where
Aroma had left off.
Meanwhile Dai-yu, on her way back to have a bath, had run into Xiang-yun and
agreed to the latter’s proposal that they should together call on Aroma to
congratulate her on her promotion. They arrived in the courtyard of Green Delights
to find everything plunged in silence. Xiang-yun went round to the side to see if
Aroma was in any of the maids’ rooms. Dai-yu went up to the main building and
peeped through the gauze window into Bao-yu’s bedroom. She saw Bao-yu, clothed
in little else but a thin, rose-coloured shirt, sprawled out asleep on the bed and
Bao-chai sitting beside him sewing, with a fly-whisk in readiness at her side.
For some moments she goggled incredulously at this touch?ing domestic scene, then,
fearful of disturbing it, she tore herself away to stifle her mounting giggles. When she
had some?what subdued them, she beckoned to Xiang-yun to come over and look.
Wondering what extraordinary spectacle could have put her in such a state,
Xiang-yun hurried over for a peep. She, too, found the scene inside a comical one
and would have burst out laughing; but in her case it was the consideration that
Bao-chai had always been so kind to her that caused her to control her mirth. And
knowing how merciless Dai-yu could be with her witticisms, she took her by the hand
and dragged her away, explaining as she did so that she had just remembered that
Aroma had said something about going at noon to wash some clothes in the lake.
‘I’m sure that’s where she will be,’ she said to Dai-yu. ‘Let’s go and look for her
there.’
Dai-yu was not in the least deceived, and showed as much by her sardonic laugh. But
she followed her nonetheless.
Bao-chai meanwhile continued her sewing undisturbed. She had just completed her
second, or maybe it was her third petal, when Bao-yu, who appeared to be dreaming,
cried out angrily in his sleep.
‘Why should I believe what those old monks and Taoists say? I don’t believe in the
marriage of gold and jade. I believe in the marriage of stone and flower.’
The words astounded her. She had still not recovered from the shock of hearing them
when Aroma returned.
‘What, isn’t he awake yet?’
Bao-chai shook her head.
‘I just now ran into Miss Lin and Miss Shi,’ said Aroma. ‘I suppose they didn’t come
in here, did they?’
‘Not that I know of,’ said Bao-chai. She glanced up at Aroma with a sly smile: ‘Did
they tell you anything?’
Aroma coloured.
‘Oh, a lot of nonsense - as usual! They were only joking, though.’
‘They weren’t joking,’ said Bao-chai, ‘- not this time. I was going to tell you myself,
but you went rushing off before I had a chance to.’
Just at that moment a maid arrived from Xi-feng summon?ing Aroma to go and see
her.
‘There you are!’ said Bao-chai. ‘That’ll be what she wants to see you about.’
Aroma had to arouse two of the sleeping maids to take her place in the inner room;
then she and Bao-chai left Green Delights together. They parted company outside,
and Aroma went off to Xi-feng’s place on her own. When she got there she was, as
Bao-chai had predicted, formally acquainted with the new arrangements concerning
her pay and status that had just been made for her by Lady Wang. She was told that
she should go over to Lady Wang’s to kotow her thanks, but that there was no need
for her to see Grandmother Jia.
She found this interview with Xi-feng acutely embarrassing. By the time she got back
from Lady Wang’s, Bao-yu was already awake. She answered him evasively when he
asked her where she had been and waited for the silence and darkness of the night
to tell him of her unofficial promotion to his bed. Bao-yu was delighted.
‘I hope there’ll be no more talk of leaving me now!’ he said, smiling broadly at her.
‘Do you remember the time when you got back from visiting your family and tried to
frighten me with all that talk about your brother wanting to buy you out of service
and how there was no future for you here and no point in your staying permanently,
and all those other heartless, unkind things you said? I’d like to see anyone trying to
take you away from me now!’
‘Huh!’ Aroma sniffed scornfully. ‘That’s not at all the way it is. I belong to Her
Ladyship now. Now if I want to leave you, I don’t have to talk to you about it at all. All
I have to do is have a word with Her Ladyship, and off I go!’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘Suppose I were at fault and you told Her Ladyship and asked her to let you go;
don’t you think you’d feel just a tiny bit uncomfortable afterwards when it got about
that you had left me because I wasn’t good enough for you?
‘Why ever should I?’ said Aroma. ‘Of course, I wouldn’t go if it meant marrying a
thief or a murderer. There’s always another way out. I could always take my own life.
We all have to die some time or other; it’s just a question of when. All you’ve got to
do is stop breathing, that’s all. After that you hear nothing, see nothing - it’s all over!’
‘Stop it, now! Stop it!’ said Bao-yu, covering her mouth with his hand. ‘You don’t
have to say things like that.’
All too familiar with the peculiarities of this master who condemned flattering
‘auspicious’ talk as false and hollow, but was upset and morose if you told him the
truth, Aroma regret?ted her blunder in having too openly spoken her mind.
Smil?ingly she turned the conversation on to topics which experience taught her
were agreeable to him: the beauties of Nature, the beauties of girls, girls. But
somehow from there the conversation imperceptibly found its way round to the
subject of girls dying. Suddenly realizing this, Aroma — it was she who was talking at
the time — broke off in alarm. Bao-yu, who up to that point had been listening to her
enthralled, laughed at her sudden silence.
‘We all have to die, as you said yourself just now. The prob?lem is how to die well.
Those whiskered idiots who take quite literally the old saw that “a scholar dies
protesting and a soldier dies fighting” and get themselves killed off on the
assumption that those are the only two ways in which a man of spirit can die
gloriously, would do better to die in their beds. For when you come to think of it, the
only real occasion for protesting is when one’s ruler is misguided, and the only real
occasion for fighting is when one’s country is at war. If the scholar is so greedy for
martyrdom that he throws away his life at the earliest opportunity, what is to
become of the poor misguided ruler in the absence of good advisers? And if the
soldier so hankers for a hero’s death that he gets himself killed off in the first
encounter, what is to become of his country without soldiers to fight its battles—?’
‘But surely,’ Aroma interrupted, ‘those famous men in the olden days laid their lives
down because they had to?’
‘Nonsense!’ said Bao-yu. ‘The soldiers among them lacked generalship; as a
consequence, they had nothing but their physical courage to rely on. They threw
their lives away out of sheer incompetence. Do you call that dying because they had
to? And the scholars were even worse. On the strength of having read a couple of
books and got up a text or two by heart, they began to cry stinking fish as soon as
they found the smallest thing at Court not as they thought it should be, in the hope
of winning themselves an imperishable reputation for honesty; then, if the Court
didn’t immediately change its policy, they would work themselves into a passion and
promptly get themselves killed. You won’t, surely, say that they died because they
had to? What you have to remember is that Emperors hold their power from Heaven,
and it’s un?thinkable that Heaven should lay the huge responsibility of empire on any
but the worthiest shoulders. So you can see that all those death-with-honour
characters you have so high an opinion of were thinking only of their own personal
fame and glory. They weren’t really thinking of their loyal duty to their sovereign at
all.
‘Now my idea of a glorious death would be to die now, while you are all around me;
then your tears could combine to make a great river that my corpse could float away
on, far, far away to some remote place that no bird has ever flown to, and gently
decompose there until the wind had picked my bones clean, and after that never,
never to be reborn again as a human being—that would be a really good death.’
‘I’m sleepy,’ said Aroma, unwilling to reply, for she had observed that his mad fit
was on him again. And Bao-yu at once closed his eyes and fell fast asleep.
By next morning the subject appeared to have been quite forgotten.

*

A day arrived when Bao-yu seemed to have exhausted the Garden’s possibilities, and
its charms were beginning to weary him. The Return of the Soul was very much on
his mind at this time. He had read it through twice without in any way abating his
appetite for more. Having recently been told that the best singer among the twelve
little actresses of Pear Tree Court was the soubrette called Charmante, he resolved,
for a change of scene, to go over there and look her up, so that he could ask her to
sing him some of the arias from it.
The only girls he recognized when he arrived there were Tresor and Topaze, who
greeted him with smiles and invited him to be seated. When he asked where
Charmante was, the girls all answered him in chorus:
‘In her room.’
Bao-yu at once went to the room indicated. Charmante was in there on her own. She
was lying stretched out on her bed, but made no attempt to get up when she saw
him enter. Nothing daunted, he sat himself down beside her and, in the familiar way
he habitually adopted with girls, smilingly re?quested her to sing the section from
the Return that begins with the words

                  In these quiet courts the floating gossamer...

But Charmante did not respond in the expected manner. She rose up quickly and
drew away from him when he sat down beside her; and in answer to his request to
sing, she informed him, with a cold, unsmiling expression, that she was ‘not invoice’.
‘I strained my voice the other day at a command perform?ance for Her Grace,’ she
said. ‘I am still resting it.’
She was sitting opposite him as she said this, so that he had a full view of her face.
He remembered now, as he studied it, where he had seen that face before. She was
the girl he had seen scratching QIANS on the ground that day under the rose pergola.
And now here she was behaving as if his very presence was distasteful to her. Never
in his life before had he experienced such instant rejection. Reduced to mumbling
incoherence by his embarrassment, he coloured, and — since there was ob?viously
no point in staying — left the room.
Surprised to see him come out again so soon, the others asked him the reason.
Trésor laughed when he told her what had happened.
‘Wait until Mr Qiang gets back,’ she said. ‘If he asks her to, she’ll sing for you.’
Bao-yu did not know quite what to make of this.
‘Qiang?’ he said. ‘Where is he, anyway?’
‘He went out only a few minutes ago,’ said Trésor. ‘I expect Charmante said she
wanted something and he’s gone out to try and get it for her.’
Bao-yu seemed to find this of enormous interest and decided to stay a little longer
and see what happened. Sure enough, Jia Qiang presently returned from his
expedition. He was carry?ing a bird-cage with a bird inside. The cage had a miniature
stage fastened to the top of it. Jia Qiang was on his way inside to look for Charmante,
obviously feeling very pleased with himself, when he caught sight of Bao-yu and
halted.
‘What’s that bird you’ve got there?’ Bao-yu asked him.
‘It’s a whitecap,’ said Jia Qiang, smiling proudly. ‘It can hold a flag in its beak and do
a little turn on the stage.’
‘How much did you pay for it?’
‘One tael and sixteen pennyweights of silver.’
He invited Bao-yu to be seated while he went into Charmante’s room to show off his
purchase; but Bao-yu, whose desire to hear Charmante sing was now quite forgotten
in his eagerness to find out exactly how things lay between her and Jia Qiang, joined
the girls as they clustered round the door-way to watch.
‘Look! Look what I’ve brought for you,’ said Jia Qiang, full of smiles.
‘What is it?’
Charmante had been lying down again, but sat up when he entered.
‘I’ve got a little bird to keep you company, to stop you get?ting so depressed. You
watch! I’ll make him perform for you.’
He took a few grains from his pocket and coaxed the bird out on to the stage, where
it picked up a diminutive mask and flag and hopped and pirouetted about like an
actor playing the warrior’s part in a play. The girls all laughed delightedly and said it
was ‘sweet’. All except Charmante. She merely gave a scornful ‘huh!’ or two and lay
back on the bed again in dis?gust.
Jia Qiang smiled — almost beseechingly.
‘How do you like it?’
‘You and your family!’ said Charmante bitterly. ‘It isn’t enough to take decent girls
from their homes and shut them up in this prison to learn beastly opera all day. Now
you have to bring a bird along to do it as well. I suppose it’s to keep me reminded of
my misery. And you have the audacity to ask me “do I like it?”!’
Her words appeared to make Jia Qiang quite frantic, for he uttered a string of the
most violent and passionate oaths in reply.
‘I’m a stupid fool and I should have known better,’ he said. ‘I spent all that money
on the thing because I thought it might cheer you up. It never occurred to me that
you might take it like this. Well, let the thing go then! It’s an “act of merit” to free
living creatures, so at least you’ll get some good from it. Either it will help you in the
next life or free you from sickness in this one.’
With that he released the bird, which promptly flew away, and stamped on the cage
until it was smashed to pieces.
‘Maybe birds aren’t as important as human beings,’ said Charmante, ‘but they have
mothers and fathers just the same. Can’t you see how cruel it is to take them away
from their nests and make them perform for people’s amusement? I coughed up two
mouthfuls of blood today. Her Ladyship sent someone to look for you. She wanted
you to get me a doctor so that we could find out what to do, but instead of a doctor
you bring this thing back with you, to make a mock of me. It’s just my luck to fall ill
when I’ve got no one to care for me or take any notice.’
She began to cry.
‘But I asked the doctor about you yesterday evening and he said it wasn’t serious,’
Jia Qiang protested. ‘He said you were to take a couple of doses of that medicine and
he’d come and look at you again in two days’ time. I’d no idea that you’d been
spitting blood. Well, I’d better go and get him straight away.’
He began to go, but Charmante called him back.
‘Stay where you are! Don’t go rushing off in this burning heat. You’re only going to
fetch him because you’re in a temper, anyway. I wouldn’t see him now if he came!’
Hearing her say this, Jia Qiang halted.
Bao-yu had been watching this scene with open-mouthed fascination. At last he
understood the real meaning of all those QIANGS. There was obviously no place for
him here, so he slipped away. Jia Qiang was so absorbed in his concern for
Charmante that he did not even notice him go and it was left to the little actresses to
see him out.
It was a reflective, self-critical Bao-yu who made his way back to Green Delights, so
bemused that he scarcely noticed where he was going. When he arrived, Dai-yu and
Aroma were sitting in conversation together. He looked at Aroma and sighed heavily.
‘What I told you the other night was wrong,’ he said. ‘I’m not surprised that Father
tells me I have a “small capacity but a great self-conceit”. I mean, that stuff about all
of you making a river of tears for me when I die: I realize now that it’s not possible. I
realize now that we each have our own allotted share of tears and must be content
with what we’ve got.’
Aroma was surprised to hear him bring this up again. She had assumed that what he
said that night was in jest and must long since have been forgotten. She laughed.
‘You know, sometimes I think you really are a bit touched!’
Bao-yu was silent.
From the curious way in which he was behaving Dai-yu could see that something had
got into him, but judged it not her business to inquire what. To change the subject
she asked him about something of a more practical nature.
‘When I was with your Mother just now she told me that it is Mrs Xue’s birthday
tomorrow. She told me to ask you whether you intend going or not. When you’ve
decided, she’d like you to send someone round and let her know.’
‘Well, I didn’t go last time, when it was Uncle She’s birth?day,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It will
be a bit awkward if I go this time and run into someone from Uncle She’s. I think I’d
better stop going to birthdays altogether. In any case, it’s terribly hot, and I should
have to dress up for it. And I don’t think Auntie would really mind if I didn’t go.’
‘That’s no way to talk!’ said Aroma. ‘There’s no compari?son whatever between Sir
She and your Aunt Xue. You’re no distance away from her, for a start. And she is your
Mother’s sister. I’m sure if you didn’t go she’d wonder what was the matter. If you’re
afraid of the heat, why don’t you go first thing in the morning, when it’s still cool? All
you need do is make your kotow and drink a cup of tea, and then you can come back
again. Surely that would be more civil?’
‘Of course you must go!’ said Dai-yu, before he had time to reply. ‘Surely you owe a
visit to the person who saved you from the mosquitoes?’
‘What mosquitoes?’ said Bao-yu, mystified. ‘What are you talking about?’
Aroma proceeded to tell him how Bao-chai had sat at his bedside with a fly-whisk
beside her while he slept.
‘How frightful!’ Bao-yu was most upset. ‘However did I come to be asleep when
she was there? And I’d got hardly anything on. How disgusting of me!’
After that there was no further question, of course. He would definitely be going over
for his Aunt Xue’s birthday on the morrow.
While the three of them were talking, Xiang-yun came in wearing her going-out
clothes and looking very dressed-up. Her uncle the Marquis’s people had arrived to
fetch her, and she had come to say good-bye. Bao-yu and Dai-yu both rose and
invited her to be seated, but she could not stay, so the two of them accompanied her
through to the front.
Xiang-yun was struggling to hold back her tears, for she dared not show her distress
openly in front of her uncle’s people. The arrival a few moments later of her dear
Bao-chai, who had hurried over specially to see her off, made going back seem even
more unbearable. Fortunately Bao-chai, always more perceptive than the others,
realized that things would become even more difficult for Xiang-yun if the servants
who had come to collect her were to tell her aunt when they got back that she had
made a fuss, so she did all she could to hasten her departure.
The two girls and Bao-yu saw Xiang-yun as far as the inner gate. Bao-yu would have
gone further, but Xiang-yun re?strained him. Nevertheless, when she had gone a
little way towards her carriage, she changed her mind and, turning back, called him
to her so that she could whisper a parting request in his ear.
‘Remind Her Old Ladyship of me from time to time, will you, in case she forgets?
Then perhaps she’ll send someone to invite me over again.’
Bao-yu gave vigorous assurances that he would do this for her, then, when they had
seen her get into her carriage, they all turned and went in again.
As to what followed, that must be looked for in the follow?ing chapter.
CHAPTER 37

A happy inspiration prompts Tan-chun to found the
Crab-flower Club
And an ingenious arrangement enables Bao-chai to settle the
chrysanthemum poem titles



THIS year Jia Zheng was appointed Commissioner for Edu?cation in one of the
provinces, with instructions to leave for his tour of duty on the twentieth of the
eighth month. When the day for his departure arrived, he took leave of his ancestors
in the family shrine, kotowed to his mother, and was seen on his way as far as the
hostelry of the ‘Tearful Parting’ (the first post-halt on his journey) by Bao-yu and
other junior male members of the clan.
Jia Zheng’s doings after his departure are not recorded in this history; we merely
observe that the departure left Bao-yu free to play and idle in the Garden to his
heart’s content witout the least fear of restraint or reprisal.

The days in idleness passed by
To swell the tale of wasted years

On the day of which we write Bao-yu was feeling very bored. He had returned from
perfunctory morning calls on his mother and grandmother and had just finished
changing back into his everyday clothes, when Tan-chun’s maid Ebony arrived
carrying a carefully-folded letter from her mistress.
‘I’m glad you’ve come,’ said Bao-yu, as she handed him the letter. ‘I’d been meaning
to see your mistress this morning, but I forgot. How is she? Is she any better?’
‘She’s quite better, thank you,’ said Ebony. ‘She’s stopped taking her medicine today.
It was only a slight chill that she was suffering from.’
Bao-yu unfolded the elegant patterned notepaper and glanced at the contents:
Dear Brother,
Some nights ago, when the moon came out in a sky freshly clear after the rain, the
garden seemed veritably awash with moonlight, and sleep in the face of so rare a
spectacle was unthinkable. Thrice the clepsydra had been turned, and still I lingered
beneath the tall paulownias, reluctant to go in. But in the end the treacherous night
air betrayed me, and by morning I was lamentably indisposed.
How kind of you to have visited me in my sickroom! and how exquisitely thoughtful
to have sent your maid-servant shortly after?wards with solicitous inquiries and with
those delicious lychees and the calligraphy by Yan Zhen-qing!
While I have been lying here quietly on my own, I have been thinking how in the
olden days even men whose lives were spent amidst the burly-burly of public affairs
would keep some quiet retreat for themselves with its tiny corner of mountain and
trickle of running water; and how they would seek, by whatever arts and
blandishments they knew of, to assemble there a little group of kindred spirits to
share in their enjoyment of it; and how, on the basis of such leisure-time associations,
rhymers’ guilds and poetry clubs were then founded, so that the fleeting inspirations
of an idle hour might often be perpetuated in imperishable masterpieces of verse.
Now although I am no poet myself, I am privileged to live ‘midst rocks and streams’
and in the company of such gifted practitioners of the poetic art as Xue and Lin; and
it seems to me a great pity that the romantic courts and pavilions of our Garden
should not echo with the jocund carousal of assembled bards, and its flowering
groves and blossoming banksides not become places of wine and song. Why should
the founding of poetry clubs be the sole preroga?tive of the whiskered male, and
female versificators allowed a voice in the tunable concert of the muses only when
some enlightened patriarch sees fit to invite them?
Will you come, then, and rhyme with us? The pathway to my door is swept to receive
you and your arrival is eagerly awaited by
                                                         Your affectionate Sister,
                                                                        Tan-chun

When Bao-yu had finished reading, he clapped his hands delightedly.
‘Dear Tan-chun! Bless her poetic soul! I must go and dis?cuss this with her straight
away.’
He strode off immediately, with Ebony following at his heels. But he had got no
further than Drenched Blossoms Pavilion when he saw one of the old nannies on
duty at the back gate of the Garden hurrying from the opposite direction with a note
in her hand. She came up to him when she saw who he was and handed him the
note.
‘From Mr Yun, sir. He’s waiting at the back gate. He sends his compliments and says
would I please give you this.’
Bao-yu opened it and read.

Dear Father,
I have the Honour to present my Humble Duty and hope this finds you as it leaves me
in the Best of health, ever since you did me the great Kindness to recognize me as
your Son I have been looking for some means of showing my appreciation of your
great kindness but so far no opportunity has presented itself, to date. However,
thanks to your esteemed Advice I have got to know several Nur?serymen also a
number of famous gardens and now through this contacts I have come across a very
rare Variety of autumn crab flower (Pure White) only very little to be had, but using
every means possible I have got two pots of it I hope you will think of me as a real
Son and not refuse to keep them for your enjoyment. However, owing to the present
Hot Weather I did not like to call in Person as the Young Ladies are outside in the
Garden a lot owing to the heat, and not wishing to give Inconvenience
I remain,
       Honoured Father,
Your Dutifully and Affected Son,
                          Jia Yun

Bao-yu laughed when he had finished reading it.
‘Is he alone?’ he asked the old woman, ‘or is there someone with him?’
‘He’s got a couple of young chaps with him carrying potted plants.’
‘I see. Well go back and thank him for me. Tell him it’s very kind of him and I very
much appreciate it. And have the pots taken to my room.’
When he had given these instructions, he continued with Ebony on his way to
Autumn Studio. He arrived to find that Bao-chai, Dai-yu, Ying-chun and Xi-chun had
all got there before him. They laughed excitedly when they saw him enter.
‘Here comes another one!’
‘I hadn’t realized that I was so popular!’ said Tan-chun. ‘I wrote to you all more or
less on the spur of the moment. It was no more than a tentative suggestion. I had no
idea it would meet with this instant response from everybody.’
‘It’s a pity you didn’t think of it earlier,’ said Bao-yu. ‘We ought to have started a
club long ago.’
‘Well I don’t think it’s a pity,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Do, by all means, have a poetry club if
you’re all so keen to, only count me out of it, please. I don’t feel up to it.’
Ying-chun laughed.
‘If you’re not, then what about the rest of us?’
‘This is no time for false modesty,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Here is a serious proposition and
one which we are obviously all enthu?siastic about. What we need are some ideas
that we can all discuss. Come on, Chai! Let’s hear what you have got to say first, then
perhaps we can hear from Cousin Lin.’
‘What’s the hurry?’ said Bao-chai. ‘We’re not even all here yet.’
Just as she was saying that, Li Wan arrived. She smiled at them all as she entered.
‘My! What a poetic lot we are! If you are going to have a poetry club, may I
propose myself for president? The idea of having one did in fact occur to me earlier
in the year, but I thought that as I can’t write poetry myself, a proposal coming from
me might seem a bit presumptuous, and I did nothing about it. Now that my poetical
sister-in-law has had the same idea, I should like to do what I can to help her get it
started.’
‘If we are definitely going to have a poetry club,’ said Dai-yu, ‘then as members of
the club we are all equals and fellow-poets. We can’t go on calling ourselves “cousin”
and “sister-in-law” all the time;’
‘I quite agree,’ said Li Wan. ‘We ought to choose pen?names to sign our poems
with, then we can use them for addressing each other by as well. I shall call myself
“Farmer Sweet-rice”. I don’t suppose anyone else will want that title.’
‘I shall call myself “Autumn Studio”,’ said Tan-chun.
‘That’s pretty unoriginal!’ said Bao-yu. ‘Can’t you do any better than that? You’ve
got all those paulownias and plantain-trees around your place: can’t you make a
name out of them?’
‘All right,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I’m very fond of my plantains. I shall call myself “Under
the Plantains”.’
‘That’s very original,’ said the others admiringly. But Dai-yu laughed.
‘Come on, everybody!’ she said. ‘Pop her in the stew-pot! We’ll have a nice piece of
venison with our wine.’
As no one could understand this recondite joke, Dai-yu undertook to explain it for
them.
“Under the plantains” is where the woodcutter in the old Taoist parable hid the
deer he had killed; so the allusion means “a deer”. In calling herself by that
pen-name, Cousin Tan is therefore offering herself to her fellow-members as venison
for them to feast on in their carousals.’
‘Oh, all right, Miss Clever！’ said Tan-chun. “   ‘Plantain Lover”, then. You wait! I’
ll be even with you yet. I’ve got just the name for her,’ she told the others. ‘When
the Emperor Shun died, his two queens are supposed to have gone along the banks
of the river Xiang looking for him. According to the legend, the two queens turned
into river goddesses and their tears became the spots you find on the bamboos that
grow along the banks of the river. That’s why there’s a kind of bamboo called “Naiad’s
Tears”. Well now, Cousin Dai lives in the Naiad’s House, and she cries so much that I
shouldn’t be at all surprised if one of these days the bamboos in her courtyard all
turned out to have spots on them; so I think the best pen-name for her would be
“River Queen”.’
The others, applauding, agreed that this was exactly the tight name for Dai-yu. Dai-yu
herself hung her head and said nothing.
‘I’ve thought of one for Bao-chai,’ said Li Wan. ‘Not regal, like Dai-yu’s, but
aristocratic, at any rate. What do you all think of “Lady All-spice”?’
‘I think the title becomes her very well,’ said Tan-chun.
‘What about me?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Isn’t anyone going to think of a name for me?’
‘Oh, you!’ said Bao-chai. ‘The obvious one for you is “Busybody” — because you
are always so busy doing nothing.’
‘Why not stick to your old pen-name, “Lord of the Flowers”?’ said Li Wan.
‘Do you have to embarrass me by reminding me of my youthful indiscretions?’ said
Bao-yu.
‘No, let me choose your name,’ said Bao-chai, ‘Actually I’ve already thought of one.
It sounds a bit common, perhaps, but I think it suits you. You are a very lucky person,
living in such luxurious and beautiful surroundings and you enjoy an exceptional
amount of leisure—in fact, I can’t think of anyone who combines quite so much luck
with quite so much leisure—so I suggest “Lucky Lounger” as the most suitable
pen-name for you.’
Bao-yu laughed good-humouredly.
‘You are flattering me! I think you’d better all call me by whatever name each of
you fancies.’
‘No, that won’t do,’ said Dai-yu. ‘As you live in the House of Green Delights, why
don’t we simply call you “Green Boy”?’
‘Yes,’ said the others. ‘Good.’
‘Now, what names are we going to have for Cousin Ying and Cousin Xi?’ said Li
Wan.
‘Neither of us is much good at poetry,’ said Ying-chun. ‘There doesn’t seem much
point in having any.’
‘No, I think you ought to have pen-names,’ said Tan-chun.
‘As Ying-chun lives on Amaryllis Eyot, she could be “Amaryllis Islander”, and as
Xi-chun lives by the Lotus Pavilion, she could be “Lotus Dweller”,’ said Bao-chai. ‘That
would seem to be the simplest solution.’
‘Yes,’ said Li Wan. ‘Those names will do very nicely. Now, I’m the eldest here, so I’m
going to propose some conditions that I’d like you all to agree to. I don’t think you’ll
have much difficulty in doing so when you’ve heard what they are. The first one is
that as three out of the seven of us founding this club—that’s to say Cousin Ying,
Cousin Xi and myself—are no good at writing poetry, I propose that the rest of you
should let us off versifying and allow us to act as your officers instead.’
‘“Cousin Ying”? “Cousin Xi”?’ said Tan-chun. ‘What’s the good of inventing all these
new names if you’re not going to use them? I think that from now on there ought to
be a penalty for not using them.’
‘First things first,’ said Li Wan. ‘Let’s get the club properly founded, and we can talk
about penalties later on. I suggest that the club should hold its meetings at my place,
because I’ve got the most room. I can’t write poetry myself, but if you don’t object to
having so illiterate a person as your host, I’m sure that as time goes by I shall grow
more poetical and re?fined under your influence.
‘My next condition is that you should make me your presi?dent. And as I shan’t be
able to manage all the official business on my own, I should like to be allowed to
co-opt two vice-presidents. I therefore nominate Amaryllis Islander and Lotus
Dweller as my assistants, one to set the themes and rhymes in our competitions and
the other to act as invigilator and copyist.
‘And lastly, although we three officers don’t have to do any versifying, we should
not be precluded from trying our hand at it if we want to. So if there is ever a fairly
simple subject with easy rhymes and we feel like joining in, we should be allowed to
do so. The rest of you, of course, have no option.
‘Well, those are my conditions. If you agree to them, I’ll be glad to help you found
the club. If not, I don’t think there would really be much point in my tagging along.’
The proposed arrangement was highly agreeable to Ying-?chun and Xi-chun, neither
of whom had much enthusiasm for writing poetry—least of all in competition with
experts like Bao-chai and Dai-yu—and they assented readily. The rest, when they saw
how willingly Ying-chun and Xi-chun acquiesced, felt that they could scarcely object
themselves and added their assent— though Tan-chun did remark, somewhat
ruefully, that it seemed a little hard, when she was the one who had thought of the
idea in the first place, that she should now have these other three sitting in
judgement over her.
‘Right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘That’s all settled. Let’s all move over to Sweet-rice Village,
then.’
‘You’re always in such a hurry!’ said Li Wan. ‘Today’s meeting is just a preliminary
discussion. Now you will have to wait for me to issue an invitation.’
‘Before we do anything else,’ said Bao-chai, ‘we had better decide how often we
are going to meet.’
‘Not too often, I hope,’ said Tan-chun, ‘otherwise it will no longer be a pleasure. I
suggest not more than two or three times a month.’
‘Twice a month will be quite enough,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Once we’ve decided which
two days to meet on, we should under-take always to turn up on those two days, wet
or fine. At the same time, we should be allowed to arrange additional meet?ings
outside the fixed dates as and when the fancy takes any of us to do so. If we leave it
that much flexible, it will be more enjoyable.’
The others agreed that this was a good proposal and should be adopted.
‘The poetry club was originally my idea,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I hope you will at least
allow me the pleasure of being your hostess at its first meeting.’
‘All right,’ said Li Wan. ‘We’ll have a meeting tomorrow and you shall entertain us,’
Why wait until tomorrow?’ said Tan-chun. ‘There’s no time like the present. You
choose a title for us, Amaryllis Islander can set the rhymes, and Lotus Dweller can
supervise us while we compose our poems.’
‘If you ask me,’ said Ying-chun, ‘I think that rather than always have the same two
people to choose the titles and set the rhymes, it would be better to draw lots.’
‘As I was on my way here just now,’ said Li Wan, ‘I saw them carrying in two pots of
white crab-blossom. It was so pretty. Couldn’t you have white crab-blossom for your
sub?ject?’
‘We haven’t all seen it yet,’ said Ying-chun. ‘How are they going to write poems
about it if they haven’t seen it?’
‘We all know what white crab-blossom looks like,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I don’t see why
we necessarily have to look at it in order to be able to write a poem about it. The
ancients used a poetic theme as a vehicle for whatever feelings they happened to
want to express at that particular moment. If they’d waited until they’d seen the
objects they were supposed to be writing about, the poems would never have got
written!’
‘Very well, then, I’ll set your rhymes,’ said Ying-chun.
She took a book of verse off the shelf, opened it at random, and held it up for the
others to see.
‘There you are: an octet in Regulated Verse. That’s the form.’
She closed the book again and turned to a little maid who was leaning in the
doorway looking on.
‘Give us a word,’ she said. ‘Any word.’
‘Door,’ said the girl.
‘That means the first line must end with “door”,’ said Ying-chun. She turned again
to the girl: ‘Another one.’
‘Pot,’ said the girl.
‘Right, “pot”,’ said Ying-chun, and going over to a little nest of drawers in which
rhyme-cards were kept, she pulled out one of them and asked the maid to select two
cards from it at random. These turned out to be the cards for ‘not’ and ‘spot’.
‘Now,’ she said to the girl, ‘pick any card out of any drawer. Just one.’
The girl pulled out another drawer and picked out the card for ‘day’.
‘All right,’ said Ying-chun. ‘That means that your first line must end in “door”, your
second in “pot”, your fourth in “not”, your sixth in “spot”, and the rhyming couplet in
the seventh and eighth lines must end in “day”.’
Tan-chun’s maid Scribe laid out four identical sets of brushes and paper for the
competitors, who all, except Dai-yu, now began, with quiet concentration, to
consider what they were going to write. Dai-yu wandered around outside, playing
with the bark of the paulownia trees, admiring the signs of autumn in the garden,
occasionally joking with the maids, and in general not giving the slightest indication
that she was engaged in the throes of composition. Ying-chun told one of the maids
to light a stick of Sweet Dreams—a kind of incense which is only about three inches
long and has a very thick wick so that it burns down fairly rapidly - and told the
competitors that they had to complete their poems by the time the incense had
burned itself out, otherwise they would be penalized.
Tan-chun soon had a poem ready. Taking up a brush, she wrote it out and, after going
over it and making a few cor?rections, handed it in to Ying-chun. Then she turned to
Bao-chai.
‘How are you doing, Lady All-spice? Have you thought of a poem yet?’
‘Well—yes, I’ve thought of something,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but I’m not very happy about
it.’
Bao-yu, meanwhile, was pacing up and down, hands clasped behind his back, in the
loggia outside. Hearing this exchange, he paused to address Dai-yu.
‘Do you hear that?’ he said. ‘The other two have nearly finished.’
‘Kindly mind your own business, would you?’ said Dai-yu. Bao-yu glanced inside
and saw that Bao-chai was busy writ?ing her poem down.
‘Lord!’ he said. ‘There’s only an inch left.’ He turned to Dai-yu again: ‘The incense
has nearly burned out. What are you still squatting over there on the damp grass
for?’
Dai-yu ignored him.
‘Oh well,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I haven’t got time to worry about you. I’ll have to start
writing my own now, whether it’s any good or not.’
He went in then, and sat down at the table to write.
‘I’m going to start reading the poems now,’ said Li Wan. ‘Anyone who hasn’t handed
in by the time I’ve finished read?ing will have to pay a fine.’
‘Farmer Sweet-rice may not be much good at writing poetry,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but she
is jolly good at reading it. She’s a very fair critic. I’m sure we shall all be willing to
accept her judgement.’ The others nodded in agreement. Li Wan picked up
Tan-?chun’s draft and the others crowded round to read it with her:

             A wintry sunset gilds the vine-wreathed door
             Where stands, mossed by old rains, the flower-pot.
             Its snowy blooms, as snow impermanent,
             Are pure as pure white jade that alters not.
             O fragrant frailty, that so fears the wind!
             Most radiant whiteness! Pull moon without spot!
             White flower-sprite, shake your silken wings! Away!
             And join with me to hymn the dying day!

All complimented Tan-chun on her poem when they had finished reading it. Then
they looked at Bao-chai’s:

             Guard the sweet scent behind closed courtyard door,
             And with prompt waterings dew the mossy pot!
             The carmine hue their summer sisters wore
             These snowy autumn blossoms envy not—
             Pot beauty in plain whiteness best appears,
             And only in white jade is found no spot.
             Chaste, lovely flowers! Silent, they seem to pray
             To autumn’s White God at the close of day.

Li Wan smiled.
‘That has the All-spice touch all right!’ Next they looked at Bao-yu’s poem.

             White Autumn’s sister stands beside the door;
             Like summer snow her blossoms till the pot—
             A Yang-fei rising naked from the bath,
             With a cool, chaste allure that she had not.
             The dawn wind could not dry those pearly tears
             With which night’s rain each floweret’s eye did spot.
             Pensive and grave, her blossoms gently sway,
             While a sad flute laments the dying day!

When they had finished reading, Bao-yu said he liked Tan-?chun’s poem best of the
three, but Li Wan insisted that Bao?-chai’s was superior. It had ‘more character’ she
said. She was about to press Dai-yu for her contribution when Dai-yu sauntered in of
her own volition.
‘Oh! have you all finished?’
She picked up a brush and proceeded, writing rapidly and without a pause, to set
down the poem that was already com?pleted in her mind. She wrote on the first
sheet of paper that came to hand and, having finished, threw it nonchalantly across
the table for the others to inspect.

             Beside the half-raised blind, the half-closed door,
             Crushed ice for earth and white jade for the pot,

They had got no further than the first couplet, when Bao-yu broke out into praises.
‘Clever! How do you get these ideas?’

             Three parts of whiteness from the pear-tree stolen,
             One part from plum for scent (which pear has not)—

All of them were impressed by this second couplet.
‘This is good. Original. It’s quite different from the other three.’
            Moon-maidens stitched them with white silken thread,
            And virgins’ tears the new-made flowers did spot,
            Which now, like bashful maids that no word say,
            Lean languid on the breeze at close of day.


‘Yes, this is the best,’ they said. ‘This is the best of the four.’
‘For elegance and originally, yes,’ said Li Wan; ‘but for character and depth I prefer
Lady All-spice’s.’
‘I think that’s a fair judgement,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I think River Queen’s has to take
second place.’
‘At all events,’ said Li Wan, ‘Green Boy’s is bottom. Do you accept that judgement,
Green Boy?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s a perfectly fair one. Mine is just not a good poem. But’ —
he smiled hopefully —‘I think we ought to reconsider the placing of All-spice’s and
River Queen’s contributions.’
‘You agreed to abide by my decisions,’ said Li Wan. ‘I don’t think the rest of you
have any say in the matter. If anyone questions a decision of mine in future, he will
have to pay a penalty.’
Bao-yu was obliged to let the matter drop.
‘I propose that our two meetings should be on the second and sixteenth of each
month,’ said Li Wan. ‘On those occasions I shall be responsible for choosing the
subjects and the rhymes. If any of you ever feels like having an extra meeting in
be?tween those dates, there’s nothing to stop you. In fact, there’s nothing to stop
you having a meeting every day, if you feel like it. But that’s entirely up to you. On
the second and six?teenth you must all come round to my place, and the meetings
on those two days are my responsibility.’
‘We really ought to have a name for the club,’ said Bao-yu. ‘We don’t want anything
banal,’ said Tan-chun; ‘on the other hand we don’t want anything too weird and
wonderful. As we started off with a poem about white crab-blossom, why don’t we
simply call ourselves “The Crab-flower Club”? That might have seemed a somewhat
banal title other things being equal, but in our case it wouldn’t be because it would
com?memorate our founding meeting.’
Tan-chun’s proposal was followed by general discussion. After partaking of the liquid
and other refreshment which she provided, the party then broke up, some returning
to their own apartments in the Garden, some going on to Grand?mother Jia’s or Lady
Wang’s apartments outside. Our record leaves them at this point and does not
specify.

*

Aroma had been present when Bao-yu received Tan-chun’s letter and had seen him
rush off excitedly with Ebony as soon as he had finished reading it, but without
having any idea what the cause of his excitement might be. Shortly after he left, two
of the old women from the back gate arrived carrying pots of white-flowering
autumn crab. Aroma asked them who the flowers were from, and when the old
women had explained, showed them where she wanted them put, after which she
took them into the servants’ quartets and made them sit down while she went off to
Bao-yu’s room to fetch some money. She weighed out twelve penny-weights of silver
and made it into a little parcel, then, taking out an additional three hundred copper
cash, hurried back to the old women.
‘The silver is to pay the beaters with,’ she told them as she handed them the money.
‘The cash is for you to buy yourselves a drink with.’
The old women stood up, beaming all over their faces. How kind, how very kind, they
said, they couldn’t possibly take it. But as Aroma insisted, they allowed themselves to
be persuaded.
‘Are there any boys on duty outside the gate?’ Aroma asked them.
‘Oh yes, there are always four there,’ said the old women, ‘to do any errands you
young ladies in the Garden happen to want done outside. If there’s anything you
want done, Miss, just let us know and we’ll get them to do it for you.’
‘It isn’t for me,’ said Aroma smiling. ‘I wouldn’t presume. It’s Master Bao. He wants
someone to go to the Marquis of Zhong-jing’s place to deliver some things to Miss
Shi. I thought that now you’re here I might as well ask you if you wouldn’t mind when
you get back telling the boys on the gate to go out and order a cab for me. Only if
they do, will you come to me for the fare, please. Don’t go bothering them in the
front about it.’
The old women departed, promising to do as she asked, while Aroma went back into
the main apartment for a saucer to put some of the things on that she was planning
to send to Xiang-yun. But when she looked on the dresser she found that the saucer
shelf was completely empty. She glanced back to where Skybright, Ripple and Musk
sat sewing together.
‘What happened to that white onyx saucer that used to be here ’ she asked them.
The girls looked at each other blankly, trying to remember. After some moments,
Skybright’s face broke into a smile.
‘I remember. I took it to Miss Tan’s with those lychees on. It’s still there.’
‘Whatever did you take that one for, when there are so many other things you
could have used?’
‘Well, yes, that’s what I said. But the dark brown lychees and the white-and-browny
onyx did go very well together. Even Miss Tan said how pretty they looked. She made
me leave the dish there, where she could look at it. That’s why I didn’t bring it back
with me. By the way, that pair of identical vases that used to be on the very top of
the dresser isn’t back yet, either.’
‘You’ll laugh if I tell you about them,’ said Ripple. ‘You know how Master Bao never
does anything by halves. Well, the other day he had a sudden rush of dutiful feelings
come over him. He’d just picked a couple of sprays of cassia and was going to put
them in a vase, when suddenly he said, “Oh! these are the first cassia flowers I’ve
picked this year. I mustn’t keep them for my own enjoyment.” So what does he do
but fetch down those two vases, put the water in them and arrange the flowers in
them himself, and go along with them (someone else carrying them, of course) to
Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship to give them each a vase. Anyway, the beauty of it
was that some of the effects of this rubbed off on the person carrying the
vases—which it so happens was me. When Her Old Ladyship saw the flowers, she
was so delighted you just can’t imagine. “Oh, look!” she said. “What a good boy he is
to me! He can’t even see a flower without thinking of his old grannie! — And people
grumble at me for being too fond of him!” Well, as I expect you know, Her Old
Ladyship normally doesn’t seem to have much use for me—I don’t know what it is,
but there’s something about me she doesn’t seem to like—but on this occasion she
gave me a hundred cash. And she called me a “poor little thing”. “Poor little thing!”
she said. “She looks so sickly! “ I can tell you, I never expected a piece of luck like that!
I mean, a hundred cash is nothing, but the honour! - in front of all those people!
Then when we got to Her Ladyship’s, Her Ladyship was with Mrs Lian and Mrs Zhao
going through her chests and looking out some of the things she used to wear when
she was a girl to give to someone — I don’t know who it was. Anyway, when she saw
us, she left off to admire the flowers. So of course Mrs Lian has to make the most of it
by putting in her pennyworth going on about how dutiful Master Bao is and how
thoughtful and how this that and the other I can’t remember a half of what she said,
there was a whole cartload of it - but whatever it was it gave Her Ladyship a lot of
face, hearing him praised like that in front of everybody, and You Know Who not
being able to say a word against him, so of course she was very pleased. And what do
you think? She gave me two dresses! Admittedly, we get new dresses every year, so
in itself being given two dresses may not seem so wonderful. But the honour!’
‘Pooh!’ said Skybright. ‘Silly girl! You don’t know much! Those would be two
dresses that she thought weren’t good enough to give to the other person. I can’t see
much honour in that!’
‘I don’t care,’ said Ripple. ‘It was still very kind of Her Ladyship, for all that.’
‘If it had been me, I shouldn’t have wanted them,’ said Skybright. ‘What? take
someone else’s old left-overs? All of us here are only maids; none of us is supposed
to be any higher than the rest, you know. Why should she give someone else the best
and give me the left-overs? No, I’m sorry. I should have had to refuse, even if it
meant offending her. I couldn’t take a thing like that lying down!’
‘Which of us was it that she gave those other dresses to?’ said Ripple, curious. ‘I’ve
been home ill these last few days. I must have been away when it happened. Be a
sport, Skyey — tell us who it was!’
‘Why, if I tell you, will you give those dresses back again?’
‘Of course not, silly! I’d just like to know,’ said Ripple. ‘I don’t care if it was Master
Bao’s little puppy-dog she gave them to, I still think Her Ladyship meant to do me a
kindness, and as far as I’m concerned, that’s all that matters.’
The other maids laughed.
‘You’d better watch what you say! That’s just who she did give them to: Master
Bao’s little dog, Flower.’
‘Wicked girls!’ said ‘Flowers’ Aroma, laughing in spite of herself, ‘taking my name in
vain! Whenever you’ve got a few moments to spare you are making fun of me.
There’s not one of you that will come to a good end!’
‘Oh, it was you,’ said Ripple. ‘I’m go sorry, I didn’t realize. Oh, I do apologize.’
‘All right, that’s enough fooling for now,’ said Aroma. ‘The question is, which of you
is going to get that saucer?’
‘Better get the vases back too, while we’re about it,’ said Musk. ‘The one in Her Old
Ladyship’s room should be safe enough, but I wouldn’t be too sure about the one at
Her Ladyship’s. There are so many people in and out of that place - especially You
Know Who and her lot. If they see anything from our room in there, they’re sure to
find some way of breaking it accidentally-on-purpose, if they get half a chance. Her
Ladyship won’t stop them. She never notices. We ought to get that one back, at least,
as soon as we can.’
‘You’re right,’ said Skybright, laying down her sewing. ‘I’ll go and get it now.’
‘No, I’ll go for that,’ said Ripple. ‘You go and get your saucer.’
‘I’m going for the vase,’ said Skybright. ‘Why should you have all the windfalls? You
others have all had a go. Now it’s my turn.’
‘You do exaggerate,’ said Musk. ‘It’s only Ripple who’s had the luck. And it was only
because of the coincidence that Her Ladyship happened to be going through her
dresses when she arrived. Do you suppose she’ll be going through them again if you
go there now?’
‘Maybe not,’ said Skybright, with a tinge of malice. ‘On the other hand maybe she’ll
notice how conscientious I am and pay me two taels a month out of her allowance.
You see’ — she paused to add this on her way out of the room —‘I know what goes
on in here. There’s no need for the play-acting.’
She ran off with a mocking laugh.
Ripple went, too, and fetched the onyx saucer from Tan-?chun’s room, after which
Aroma made ready the things that were to go to Xiang-yun, and called in old Mamma
Song - one of the nannies attached to Green Delights — to give her in?structions for
their delivery.
‘Get yourself smartened up and change into your best things,’ she said. ‘I want you
to go out presently and take some things for me to Miss Shi’s.’
‘You can give them to me now, Miss — and any message that you want me to
deliver,’ said Mamma Song; ‘then I can go off straight away, as soon as I’ve got myself
ready.’
Aroma fetched two little boxes of lacquer and bamboo basketwork and taking the
tops off them, put foxnuts and caltrops in one and a saucerful of chestnut fudge
(made of chestnut puree steam-cooked with cassia-flavored sugar) in the other.
‘These are all our own things or made from our own things freshly gathered in the
Garden that Master Bao is sending Miss Shi a taste of,’ she said. ‘Tell her the onyx
saucer the fudge is on is the one she was admiring last time she was here and she is
to keep it. This silk bag has got the sewing in that she asked me to do for her. Tell her
the needlework’s a bit on the rough side, but I’m sure she’ll understand. And say
Master Bao sends his regards. And of course I present my compliments. I think that’s
all.’
‘Isn’t there any message from Master Bao?’ said Mamma Song. ‘Perhaps you’d
better ask him, Miss, just in case. We don’t want him saying afterwards that we’ve
forgotten some?thing.’
‘Didn’t he go round just now to Miss Tan’s place?’ Aroma asked Ripple.
‘Yes,’ said Ripple. ‘They’re all round there. They were having a discussion about
setting up a poetry club, what?ever that might be, and they were writing poems,
some of them.’ She turned to Mamma Song. ‘I shouldn’t think he’d have anything to
say. I should just push on, if I were you.’
Mamma Song took up the boxes and went off to get herself ready.
‘When you are ready, go out by the back gate,’ said Aroma as she was leaving.
‘You’ll find some of the boys there and a cab waiting for you.’
Mamma Song then left. The details of her expedition are unrecorded.

*

Some time after this Bao-yu got back. The first thing he did on arrival was to go and
look at the autumn crab-flowers. When he had finished admiring them, he went into
the house and told Aroma all about the poetry club, after which Aroma told him how
she had sent Mamma Song to Shi Xiang-yun’s with a present of things from the
Garden. Bao-yu smote his palms together in vexation.
‘Oh, we forgot about her! I knew there was something we ought to have done and
hadn’t, but I couldn’t think what it was. I’m glad you’ve reminded me. We must invite
her over at once, of course. The poetry club will be nothing without her in it.’
‘I don’t think I’d be in such a hurry to, if I were you,’ said Aroma. ‘It’s only an
amusement, this poetry thing, and Miss Shi doesn’t have the time for amusement
that the rest of you do. It isn’t as if she were her own mistress, you know. Even if you
tell her about this and she wants to come, it doesn’t follow that they’ll let her.
Suppose they don’t. She’ll only fret about it; and then all you’ll have done will be to
have made her feel miserable for nothing.’
‘That’s no problem,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I shall ask Her Old Ladyship to have her fetched.’
Just then Mamma Song got back, mission completed, bear?ing Xiang-yun’s thanks to
Aroma for the things.
‘She asked me what Master Bao was doing,’ said the nannie, ‘so I told her that he
and the young ladies were starting a poetry club or some such. She was very upset.
“Oh!” she said, “are they writing poetry? I wish they’d have told me about it!”’
Bao-yu waited to hear no more. Dashing round to his grandmother’s, he insisted that
she should send instantly to have Xiang-yun fetched.
‘It’s too late now,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘We’ll send for her first thing tomorrow.’
Bao-yu had to be content with that, and went back to his room much downcast. He
was round at Grandmother Jia’s first thing next morning again, pestering; but it was
not until the early afternoon that Xiang-yun eventually arrived and his equanimity
was restored.
As soon as they were all together, Bao-yu began to tell Xiang-yun how the club had
come to be founded and what they had done at its first meeting. He was about to
show her the poems that they had written, but Li Wan prevented him.
‘Don’t let her see them yet,’ she said. ‘Just tell her the rhymes. As she missed our
first meeting, her penalty shall be to make up another poem now, using the same
rhymes that we did. If it’s all right, we shall invite her to join the club straight away. If
not, she must first entertain us all at our next meeting as a further penalty.’
‘I like that!’ said Xiang-yun, laughing. ‘You should be the ones to pay a penalty, for
having forgotten to invite me. Well, show me the rhymes, then. I’m not much good at
this sort of thing, but I don’t mind making a fool of myself. As long as you’ll let me
join your club, I don’t mind what I have to do sweep the floor and light the incense
for you, if you like!’
Delighted to see her so enthusiastic, and still reproaching themselves for having
forgotten about her at their inaugural meeting, the rest of them made haste to give
her the rhyme-words so that she could begin.
Xiang-yun was much too excited for careful composition. Having, even while they
were all talking, concocted a number of verses in her head, she took up a brush and
proceeded to write them down, without a single pause for correction, on the first
piece of paper that came to hand.
‘There you are!’ she said, handing it to the others. ‘I’ve written two poems using
the rhymes you gave me. I don’t know whether they’re any good or not, but at least I
have done what was told!’
‘We thought our four had just about scraped the barrel,’ they told her. ‘We couldn’t
have written one more poem on the subject, let alone two! Whatever can you have
found to say in them? I bet they just repeat what we said in ours.’
But when they looked at the poems, this is what they read.

1

                  Of late a goddess came down to my door
                  And planted seeds of white jade in a pot,
                  From which a wondrous white Frost Maiden grew,
                  Who, loving cold, all other things loves not.
                  Last night a cloud passed by, whose autumn shower
                  Her cold, unweeping eyes with tears did spot;
                 Since when, the poet here takes up his stay,
                 To praise her loveliness by night and day.

2

                 Where flower-fringed steps approach the ivied door,
                 At the wall’s foot or in a graceful pot—
                 What flowers do more sad autumn-thoughts inspire
                 Than these, whose pureness others rival not?
                 Wax teats their petals seem, by wind congealed,
                 Or filtered moonlight, flecked with many a spot.
                 Weep they because the shadows stole away
                 Their goddess-queen, who now makes dark night day?

The reading of these poems was punctuated at the end of each line with expressions
of admiration and surprise, and when they had got to the end, all of them agreed
that these two poems had made the exercise a worth-while one and fully justified
their naming the new society ‘The Crab-flower Club’.
‘You must let me provide the refreshments tomorrow as my penalty,’ said
Xiang-yun. ‘I hope you will all consent to be my guests.’
‘Splendid!’ they said; and proceeded to show her the poems they had written the
day before, and to discuss them with her.

*

That evening Bao-chai, who had invited Xiang-yun to spend the night with her at
Allspice Court, sat with her guest under the lamplight while the latter discussed
themes for the mor?row’s meeting and plans for the projected entertainment. As it
became increasingly apparent that her ideas on the subject were quite impracticable,
Bao-chai presently interrupted the flow.
‘The club has only just been founded and this will be its first entertainment,’ she
said. ‘Although it’s all only a game, you are setting a precedent, so you need to think
about it rather carefully. If the entertainment is to be equally enjoyable for everyone,
you don’t want it to be too much of a burden on you; but on the other hand you
don’t want the others to feel that they are being given short commons. Now, you are
not your own mistress, and the few strings of cash they give you a month at home
are not even enough for your own needs. And if your Aunt got to hear that you were
spending money on a frivolous thing like this, she would have still more to grumble
about than usual. In any case, even if you spent all you’d got, it still wouldn’t be
enough to provide an entertainment for several people. So what are you going to do?
You obviously can’t send home for money. Are you going to ask them here for some?’
Xiang-yun, brought back to the realities of her situation, was very much dashed.
While she hesitated, Bao-chai went on.
‘Actually I’ve thought of a way out of this. An assistant in one of our pawnshops
comes from a place where they have very good crabs. Now nearly everyone here
from Lady Jia and Aunt Wang downwards is fond of crabs and only the other day
Aunt Wang was saying that we ought to have a crab and cassia-viewing party for Lady
Jia. It’s only because she has been otherwise occupied that she hasn’t done anything
about it. Why not issue a general invitation, making no mention of the poetry club —
we can write all the poems we want to after the rest of them have gone — and I shall
ask my brother to let us have a few baskets of the biggest, fattest-looking crabs and
tell him to get us a few jars of good wine and side-dishes for four or five tables from
the shop? That should save a lot of trouble for you and make more of an occasion of
it for every?body else.’
Xiang-yun felt deeply grateful to Bao-chai and praised her warmly for her
thoughtfulness. Bao-chai smiled deprecatingly.
‘Now you mustn’t go imagining things and feel that you are being treated like a
poor relation! It’s only because I am so fond of you that I have ventured to make this
proposal. If you promise you won’t take it amiss, I can get them to arrange it for us
straight away.’
‘My dearest girl!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Of course I shan’t take it amiss! How can you
suggest such a thing? If you do so again, I shall begin to think that you aren’t really
fond of me at all! I may be a silly goose, but there are some things I understand! Do
you think that if I didn’t look on you as my own true sister I should ever have told you
last time I was here about all those tiresome things I have to put up with at home?’
Reassured, Bao-chai called in an old woman to take a mes?sage outside to her
brother.
‘Tell Mr Pan to get us a few baskets of crabs like the ones we had the other day. It’s
for after lunch tomorrow. We’re having a cassia-viewing party in the Garden for Their
Ladyships. Tell him please not to forget, because I’ve already invited all the guests.’
The old woman went off to deliver her message. In due course she reported back
again — but these are details omitted from our story.
Bao-chai resumed her conversation with Xiang-yun.
‘About the theme for tomorrow’s poems,’ she said. ‘We don’t want anything too
outlandish. If you look at the works of the great poets, you find that they didn’t go in
for the weird and wonderful titles and “daring” rhymes that people now?adays are
so fond of. Outlandish themes and daring rhymes do not produce good poetry. They
merely show up the poverty of the writer’s ideas. Certainly one wants to avoid
clichés; but one can easily go too far in the pursuit of novelty. The im?portant thing is
to have fresh ideas. If one has fresh ideas, one does not need to worry about clichés:
the words take care of themselves. But what am I saying all this for? Spinning and
sewing is the proper occupation for girls like us. Any time we have left over from that
should be spent in reading a few pages of some improving book — not on this sort of
thing!’
‘Yes,’ said Xiang-yun, without much conviction; but presently smiled as a new idea
occurred to her.
‘I’ve just thought of something. Yesterday’s theme was “White Crab-blossom”. The
flower I’d like to write about is the chrysanthemum. Couldn’t we have
“Chrysanthemums” as our theme for tomorrow?’
‘It is certainly a very seasonable one,’ said Bao-chai. ‘The trouble is that so many
people have written about it before.’
‘Yes,’ said Xiang-yun, ‘I suppose it is rather a hackneyed one.’
Bao-chai thought for a bit.
‘Unless of course you somehow involved the poet in the theme,’ she said. ‘You
could do that by making up verb-object or concrete-abstract tides in which
“chrysanthemums” was the concrete noun or the object of the verb as the case
might be. Then your poem would be both a celebration of chrysanthemums and at
the same time a description of some action or situation. Such a treatment of the
subject has been tried in the past, but it is a much less hackneyed one. The
combining of narrative and lyrical elements in a single treat?ment makes for
freshness and greater freedom.’
‘It sounds a splendid idea,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘But what sort of verbs or abstract nouns
had you in mind? Can you give me an example?’
Bao-chai thought for a bit.
‘What about “The Dream of the Chrysanthemums”?’
‘Yes, that’s a good one,’ said xiang-yun. ‘I’ve thought of one too. Couldn’t we have
“The Shadow of the Chrysanthe?mums”?’
‘Ye-e-es,’ said Bao-chai, doubtfully. ‘The trouble is, it’s been used before. Still, if we
had a lot of titles we could probably slip it in. I’ve thought of another.’
‘Well, come on then!’ said Xiang-yun.
‘What about “Questioning the Chrysanthemums”?’
Xiang-yun slapped the table appreciatively.
‘That’s a lovely one!’ Presently she added: ‘I’ve thought of another. What do you
think of “Seeking the Chrysanthe?mums”?’
‘That should be interesting,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Let’s start making a list. We’ll write
down up to ten titles and then see what we think of them.’
The two of them busied themselves for some minutes grinding ink and softening a
brush. Xiang-yun then proceeded to write down the titles at Ban-chai’s dictation.
Soon they had ten. Xiang-yun read them over.
‘Ten doesn’t make a set,’ she said. ‘We need two more to make a round dozen, then
we shall have just the right number for a little album.’
Ban-chai supplied two more without too much difficulty.
‘If we’re thinking in terms of a sequence of poems,’ she said, ‘we may as well, while
we’re about it, arrange these titles in some sort of order.’
‘ That’s it!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Then they will be all ready for making our
“Chrysanthemum Album” with afterwards.’
“‘Remembering the Chrysanthemums” should come first,’ said Bao-chai.
‘Now, let’s see. When you remember them, you realize you haven’t got any, so you
go and look for some. So “Seeking the Chrysanthemums” will be the second title.
‘ Well, having found some, you will want to plant them; so “Planting the
Chrysanthemums” will be the third title.
‘After you’ve planted them and the flowers have come out, you’ll want to stand
and look at them; so the fourth title will be “Admiring the Chrysanthemums”.
‘You won’t be able to have enough of them by just standing and admiring them, so
you’ll naturally want to pick some and arrange them in a vase so that you can enjoy
them indoors. That means “Arranging the Chrysanthemums” for Number Five.
‘But however much you enjoy them, you will feel that they somehow lack their full
lustre without words to grace them, and so you will want to celebrate them in verse.
That means “Celebrating the Chrysanthemums” will be the sixth title.
‘Well now, let’s suppose you’ve just finished writing some verses about them.
You’ve got the ink ready-made and the brush is still in your hand and you feel like
paying the chrysanthemums a further tribute. What should you do but paint them?
That’s Number Seven. “Painting the Chrysan?themums”.
‘Now in spite of these silent tributes, you still don’t know the secret of the
chrysanthemums’ mysterious charm and you can’t resist asking them. Which brings
us to Number Eight “Questioning the Chrysanthemums”.
‘And if the chrysanthemums could really reply, it would be so delightful that you
would want to have them near you all the time - and how better than by “Wearing
the Chrysanthe?mums”? That’s Number Nine.
‘That brings us to the end of the verb-object titles which involve the poet himself as
the understood subject of the action. But there remain other kinds of treatment, in
which we consider the flowers by themselves without postulating the presence of
the poet. So we have “The Shadow of the Chrysanthemums” and “The Dream of the
Chrysanthe?mums” as Numbers Ten and Eleven.
‘And of course “The Death of the Chrysanthemums” at the end of the album to
round off on a suitable note of melan?choly.
‘There you are! All three months of autumn condensed into a single sequence of a
dozen poems!’
Xiang-yun recopied the twelve titles in the order that Bao?-chai had indicated, then,
after running her eye rapidly over them, she asked Bao-chai what rhyme-scheme
they should set.
‘I have always disliked set rhymes,’ said Bao-chai. ‘If you have a good poem in the
making, why shackle it with the constraints of an arbitrary rhyme-scheme? Let us
leave set rhymes to vulgar pedants; all we need do is give out the titles and let the
others choose their own rhyme-schemes for them?selves. After all, the object of the
exercise is to give people enjoyment—the enjoyment gained by producing an
occasional felicitous line. We aren’t out to make things difficult for them.’
‘I entirely agree,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘And I am sure that in this way we shall get better
poems. There’s just one thing, though: we have twelve titles now but only five
people writing poems. Presumably we aren’t going to ask each of them to produce a
poem for every one of the titles?’
‘Oh no, that would be much too difficult,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Make a fair copy of the list
of titles, merely indicating that the poems are to be octets in Regulated Verse, put it
up on the wall where everyone can see it, and then simply let them choose
whichever titles they like. If anyone has the energy to do them all, they are welcome
to try. If they can’t manage more than one, let them do just one. Skill and speed are
what we shall be looking for. As soon as all of the twelve tides have been covered, we
shall call a halt, and anyone who goes on writing after that will be made to pay a
penalty.’
Xiang-yun did not see that this last stipulation was neces?sary, but otherwise agreed
with her, and the two girls, having satisfied themselves that their plans for the
morrow were now complete, put out the light and composed themselves for sleep.
As to the outcome of their plans: that will be told in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 38

River Queen triumphs in her treatment of chrysanthemum themes
And Lady Allspice is satirical on the subject of crabs



THE last chapter concluded with Ban-chai and Xiang-yun retiring for the night after
their plans for the morrow had been completed. This one begins next morning, when
Xiang-yun invited Grandmother Jia and the rest to a cassia-viewing party in the
Garden. Touched by her enthusiasm, the grown-ups readily agreed to go.
‘She is so excited, bless her!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘We ought to let her do this,
even though she is our guest.’
And having promised, she was as good as her word, and arrived in the Garden at
noon, bringing Lady Wang, Wang Xi-feng and Aunt Xue with her and a number of
attendant maids.
‘Now where is it going to be?’ she asked them.
‘Wherever you like, Mother,’ said Lady Wang dutifully.
‘I think they’ve already prepared for us in the Lotus Pavilion,’ said Xi-feng. ‘The
blossom on the two cassia-trees is particularly line there this year, and there is that
lovely clear, emerald water. When you sit in the little centre pavilion, you have water
all round you, which gives you a wonderful feeling of spaciousness. And looking at
water is so restful for the eyes.’
‘Very well,’ said Grandmother Jia, and began to lead the way to the Lotus Pavilion.
The pavilion was built in the middle of the Garden’s little river at one of the places
where it broadened into a wide, deep pool. It had windows all round it and could be
approached either circuitously from one side by way of one of the two many-angled
covered piers leading to its left and right-hand verandahs, or more directly from the
other by means of a bamboo bridge leading to the centre of the verandah at the back.
It was towards this bamboo bridge that the party was now making its way. As
Grandmother Jia stepped on to it, Xi-feng hurried forward to support her.
‘You can put your feet down as hard as you like, Grannie,’ she said. ‘Bamboo
bridges always creak like this when you go over them. They are meant to.’
The Lotus Pavilion was in reality not one pavilion but two, for the main pavilion
properly so called gave on to a smaller pavilion, referred to simply as ‘the water
pavilion’ or the centre pavilion’, which was in the very middle of the little lake.
When they were all inside the main pavilion, they noticed that two bamboo tables
had been set out on the verandah. On one of them were ranged winecups,
chopsticks and all things needful for serving wine, and on the other were teacups,
tea?pots, tea-whisks, saucers, and various other tea-things. Beside the tea-table two
or three maids were busy fanning a little tri?pod stove on which water for tea-making
was being boiled, while at the other end of the verandah maids were fanning a stove
on which water for warming the wine-kettles was being heated. Grandmother Jia was
particularly impressed by the arrangements for tea-making and remarked with
pleasure how clean everything looked—including the spot that had been chosen for
the party.
‘Cousin Bao-chai helped me get it ready,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Well, I’ve always said she
was a thoughtful child,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘A lot of thought has certainly gone
into these preparations.’
As she was speaking, her eye fell on a pair of boards that hung from two of the pillars.
The couplet inscribed on them was in mother-o’-pearl inlay on a black lacquer
background. She asked Xiang-yun to read it out to her. This is what it said:

             Lotus reflections shatter at the dip of a lazy oar-blade
             Lotus fragrances float up from the swirl round a bamboo bridge-pile

After hearing the couplet, Grandmother Jia glanced up at the horizontal board which
bore the name of the pavilion and was in characters large enough for her to read
herself. She turned to Aunt Xue, who was standing beside her.
‘When I was a girl, there was a pavilion like this one in our garden at home. It was
called—let me see—“Above the Clouds” because of the sky reflected in the water
below, you see. When I was about the same age as these young people are now, I
used to go with the others every day there to play. One day I slipped and fell down
into the water. I nearly drowned. They had a terrible job getting me out. And even
then I caught my head on one of the wooden pegs on the way up. I’ve still got a place
big enough to put the tip of a linger in where it hit me. It’s on the side here, just
where the hair begins. Of course, at the time everyone thought it was all up with me.
They were sure that after being all that time in the water I’d catch my death of cold.
But I got over it.’
‘If you hadn’t,’ said Xi-feng before anyone else could speak, ‘what would have
happened to all the good fortune you’ve enjoyed, Grannie? It’s obvious you were
meant to have it, otherwise why would you have been given that dent in your head?
The guardian spirits must have put it there to store your good fortune in. Old
Longevity has got a dent in his head, too; only his has got so much good fortune
packed into it that it bulges out a bit.’
This comical allusion to the God of Longevity’s enormous cranium set all of them
laughing — including, of course, the old lady herself.
‘Naughty monkey!’ she said. ‘Make fun of me, would you? I’d like to tear that
wicked mouth of yours!’
‘It’s because I wanted to make you laugh, Grannie. Laugh?ter makes the humours
circulate. We’re going to be eating crabs shortly, and I was afraid that the cold of the
crab-meat might settle on your heart. If I can make you laugh and stir your humours
up, you’ll be able to eat as much crab as you like without taking any harm from it.’
‘In that case I shall have to keep you with me all the time, so that I am always
laughing,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’ll have to stop you going home at night.’
‘It’s because you indulge her so much that she is so cheeky, Mother,’ said Lady
Wang. ‘By saying things like that to her you will make her even worse.’
‘But I like her cheekiness!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘After all, there’s no harm in it.
She knows what’s what underneath it all, of course she does. I think it’s nice that the
young people should feel free to joke and laugh a bit when we are all on our own
together. We don’t want them behaving like a lot of stuffed dummies, surely?’
While she was saying this, they all passed into the smaller pavilion, where tea was
served, after which Xi-feng came bustling in with winecups and chopsticks and began
to lay. Grandmother Jia sat with Aunt Xue, Bao-chai, Dai-yu and Bao-yu at a centre
table, and Xiang-yun, Lady Wang, Ying?-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun at a table on the
east side of the room. A little table was laid for Xi-feng and Li Wan on the west side of
the doorway, but this was only for form’s sake, since both of them remained on their
feet in order to wait on the other two tables.
‘We shan’t want all the crabs at once,’ said Xi-feng to the servants bringing them in.
‘Ten will be enough to start with. The others can go back into the steamer.’
She called for some water, and after washing her hands, stood at the centre table
facing Grandmother Jia and began shelling the crabs. She offered the first meat, as a
courtesy, to Aunt Xue.
‘No thank you,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘I don’t need anyone to do it for me. I like doing it
myself and getting crabby fingers. I think they taste better when you eat them with
your fingers.’
Xi-feng gave the crab-meat she had prepared to Grand?mother Jia. The second lot
she offered to Bao-yu. Then she called for some ‘really hot wine’. She also sent a little
maid to fetch mung-bean flour scented with chrysanthemum leaves and cassia for
cleaning the lingers with and removing the smell of crab.
Xiang-yun sat with the others at her own table for a while, but as soon as she had
finished her first crab, got up to look after her guests. She also went outside and gave
orders for a plate of crabs to be taken to Aunt Zhao and another to Aunt Zhou. At
once Xi-feng came bearing down on her.
‘You’re not used to this. You get on with your eating and leave this to me! I’ll have
mine when the rest of you have finished.’
But Xiang-yun, refusing to be put off, ordered a long table to be laid on the verandah
at the far side of the Lotus Pavilion and invited the maids Faithful, Amber, Sunset,
Suncloud and Patience to come and sit at it.
Faithful glanced laughingly in Xi-feng direction.
‘I can’t very well sit down and eat while Mrs Lian is waiting on everybody.’
‘That’s all right,’ said Xi-feng. ‘You all go and sit down. I’ll take care of everything.’
At that Xiang-yun, too, went back to her seat.
Li Wan and Xi-feng now made a brief pretence of joining in the party, but Xi-feng was
soon on her feet again minister?ing to the rest. After a few minutes she went out on
to the verandah, where Faithful and the other maids were regaling themselves with
great gusto. They rose to their feet when they saw her come.
‘What have you come out here for, Mrs Lian?’ said Faith?ful. ‘Can’t you leave us
alone to enjoy ourselves for a bit?’
‘Well, aren’t you disagreeable!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Here am I doing all the work for you,
but instead of thanks I get grumbled at! I was hoping you would offer me a drink.’
Faithful, laughing, quickly filled a winecup and held it to Xi-feng lips. Tilting her head
back, Xi-feng drained it at a gulp. Amber and Sunset followed suit, and two more
cupfuls went down in the same way. Meanwhile Patience had been scooping out
some ‘yolk’ — the delicious golden crab-spawn — which she now offered to her
mistress. Xi-feng told her to put lots of ginger and vinegar on it, then, having quickly
disposed of it, ‘You can all sit down now and get on with your party,’ she said. ‘I’m
going.’
‘What a nerve!’ said Faithful. ‘Scrounging off us like that!’
‘You’d better be careful what you say to me, my girl,’ said Xi-feng with a smile. ‘I
suppose you realize that Mr Lian has taken a fancy to you and is going to ask Her Old
Ladyship if he can have you for his Number Two?’
Faithful tutted and shook her head. It was easy to see that she was blushing.
‘Huh!’ she said. ‘Fancy a lady saying a thing like that! I’m going to wipe my smelly
fingers on your face, Mrs Lian, if it’s the last thing I do.’
‘No, no! Please! Forgive me!’ said Xi-feng, as Faithful stood up to carry out her
threat.
‘Even if she does,’ said Amber, laughing, ‘I wouldn’t be too sure that Patience will.
Look at her, all of you! She hasn’t eaten two crabs yet, but she’s already finished a
saucerful of vinegar!’
Patience, who had in her hand a crab richly endowed with ‘yolk’ that she had just
finished shelling, held it up when she heard this jibe and advanced on Amber,
intending to smear her face with it.
‘You nasty, spiteful little creature!’ she said, both laughing and indignant. ‘I’ll—’
But Amber dodged aside, and Patience, losing her balance, plastered the crab smack
on to her mistress’s cheek. Xi-feng, at that moment still preoccupied with Faithful,
was taken completely by surprise. Her startled ‘Aiyo!’ was too much for the maids,
who collapsed in uncontrollable laughter. Xi-feng presently joined in, though cursing
Patience as she did so.
‘Stupid cow! Are you too drunk to see straight? All over my face!’
Patience hurriedly wiped it off and fetched water for her to wash with.
‘Holy Name!’ said Faithful. ‘That was a judgement, if ever there was one!’
Hearing the laughter outside, Grandmother Jia eagerly asked to know its cause.
‘What is it? What have you seen that’s so funny? Tell us, so that we can share the
joke.’
Faithful shouted back, amidst laughter.
‘Mrs Lian came over here and stole some of our crab. Patience didn’t like it, so she
smeared crab-yolk all over her mistress’s face, and now the two of them are having a
fight.’
Hoots of laughter from Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang.
‘Poor Mrs Lian!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You ought to feel sorry for her. Couldn’t you
spare her a few of the legs or some of the underneath bits?’
There was renewed laughter from the maids. Faithful shouted back again.
‘She can have all the crab’s-legs on this table, and very welcome to them!’
Xi-feng, taking all in good part, finished washing her face and went back to help
Grandmother Jia and the others at the centre table with their crabs.
Dai-yu dared not eat very much because of her delicate health, and after consuming
a little of the claw-meat, excused herself from the table. Soon Grandmother Jia, too,
had finished eating, and everyone washed their hands and broke off for a while to
amuse themselves, some going off to admire the flowers, some to drop things in the
water and watch the fish rise.
‘It’s rather windy for you here, Mother,’ said Lady Wang, ‘— especially after you’ve
just been eating crab. Perhaps you ought to go back to your own room now and test.
If you have enjoyed it, we could come again tomorrow.’
‘Yes, perhaps you are right,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I hadn’t been going to leave,
because I could see how much they were all enjoying themselves and was afraid of
spoiling the fun. But perhaps you and I ought to be getting along now.’
As she rose to leave, she turned to address Xiang-yun.
‘Don’t let your Cousin Bao-yu eat too much!’
‘No, Grandma.’
She turned once more as she was leaving, this time including Bao-chai in her
admonition.
‘And don’t you two eat too much, either. Crab is very good to eat, but it isn’t very
good for you. If you eat too much of it, it will give you stomach-ache.’
‘Yes, Grandma.’
The two girls saw her out of the Garden. When they were back again, they gave
orders for the tables to be cleared and a new set of places to be laid; but Bao-yu
objected.
‘No, don’t lay again,’ he said. ‘We want to get on with the poetry. Put the big round
table in the middle with all the food and drink on it so that we can help ourselves
when we feel like it and sit where we like. That will be much nicer than having set
places.’
Bao-chai agreed; but Xiang-yun reminded them that there were others besides
themselves to be considered, and having first ordered a separate table to be laid and
some good hot crabs to be selected, she invited Aroma, Nightingale, Chess, Scribe,
Picture, Oriole and Ebony to come and sit at it. After that she had a couple of carpets
spread out on the ground beneath the cassia-trees at the foot of the rockery and
made the old nannies and junior maids sit down on them and eat and drink to their
hearts’ content, insisting that they need only get up to wait on them if they were
specially called for. Then she took the list of poem-titles and pinned it to the inside
wall of the pavilion.
‘Very original!’ the others commented when they had finished reading the titles,
but went on to express the fear that they might find them difficult to write on.
Xiang-yun explained what they had decided about rhymes: viz. that there should be
no set rhyme-scheme and everyone should be free to choose their own.
‘Now that’s what I call sensible!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I can’t stand set rhymes.’
Dai-yu had a barrel-shaped porcelain tabouret moved up to the verandah’s edge, and
having selected a fishing-rod for herself, sat leaning on the railing, fishing.
Bao-chai sat for some time silently contemplating a spray of cassia she had picked,
then, leaning over the railings and idly plucking off the flowerets, dropped them one
by one into the water and watched the fish swim up from below and nibble at them
with plopping noises as they floated on the surface.
Xiang-yun for the most part sat quietly musing, occasion?ally getting up to look after
Aroma and the other maids at the table outside, or to make sure that the people
sitting on the carpets were getting enough to eat and drink.
Tan-chun stood with Li Wan and Xi-chun in the shade of a weeping willow, watching
the water-fowl.
Ying-chun sat apart from the rest beneath a flowering tree, stringing jasmine
blossoms into a flower-chain with a needle and thread.
Bao-yu watched Dai-yu fishing for a bit, then went over and leaned on the railings
and talked with Bao-chai for a bit, and finally, after watching Aroma and the other
maids eating and drinking at their table, ended up by drinking with them himself
while Aroma shelled a crab for him.
Presently Dai-yu put down her fishing-rod, went over to the central table, took up a
silver ‘self-service’ wine-kettle whose surface was carved with a nielloed plum-flower
pattern, and, having selected a little shallow, rose-quartz winecup, was just about to
pour herself a drink, when a maid observed her and came hurrying up to do it for her.
‘No, let me pour it myself,’ said Dai-yu. ‘That is half the fun. You get on with your
party.’
So saying, she proceeded to half-fill the tiny receptacle with liquor from the silver
kettle. But it proved to be yellow rice-wine, whereas what she wanted was spirits.
‘I only ate a small amount of crab,’ she said, ‘but it has given me a slight heart-burn.
What I really need is some very hot samshoo.’
‘ We have some,’ said Bao-yu, and quickly ordered a kettle of special
mimosa-flavoured samshoo to be heated for her. Dai-yu took only a sip of it before
putting the winecup down again.
Presently Bao-chai strolled up and helped herself to the samshoo. She, too, put her
cup down after taking only a tiny mouthful of it. Then she moistened a brush with ink,
and going over to the list of titles, put a tick over the first one, ‘Remembering the
Chrysanthemums’, and wrote the word ‘Allspice’ underneath it.
‘Please leave Number Two for me, Chai,’ said Bao-yu anxiously. ‘I’ve already
thought of four lines for it.’
Bao-chai laughed.
‘I’ve had a hard enough job thinking of lines for this first one. You’ve nothing to
worry about as far as I’m con?cerned.’
Dai-yu, without saying a word, quietly relieved Bao-chai of the brush, ticked first
‘Questioning the Chrysanthemums’ and then the eleventh title, ‘The Dream of the
Chrysanthemums’, and wrote ‘River’ underneath each of them.
After her, Bao-yu took up the brush and ticked ‘Seeking the Chrysanthemums’. He
signed himself ‘Green’.
Tan-chun now drifted over and looked at the list.
‘Oh, hasn’t anyone chosen “Wearing the Chrysanthemums” yet?’ she said. ‘Let me
do that one.’
She turned, smilingly, to Bao-yu and pointed a warning finger at him.
‘We’ve just made a new rule, by the way. No naked ladies this time, please. You
have been warned!’
Xiang-yun strolled up while she was saying this and ticked Numbers Four and Five —
‘Admiring the Chrysanthemums’ and ‘Arranging the Chrysanthemums’ — in rapid
succession. She signed herself ‘Xiang’ underneath them.
‘You ought to have a pen-name like the test of us,’ said Tan-chun.
‘There are various pavilions and studios at home, of course,’ said Xiang-yun, ‘but I
don’t live in any of them. It would be rather pointless to call myself after a building
like the rest of you.’
‘What about that water pavilion “Above the Clouds” that Lady Jia was telling us
about?’ said Bao-chai. ‘You could call that yours. Even if it doesn’t exist any more,
you can pretend that it would have been yours. You should call yourself “Cloud
Maiden”.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said the others; and before Xiang-yun herself could do anything, Bao-yu
had crossed out the ‘Xiang’ and substituted the word ‘Cloud’ beneath it.
In less time than it would take to eat a meal, poems had been completed for each of
the twelve titles. The young poets then wrote out their poems and handed them in
to Ying-chun, who copied them out, each with the full pen-name of its author, on to
the finest Snow Wave notepaper.
Li Wan then read them all through, the others overlooking her.

Remembering the Chrysanthemums
by Lady Allspice
The autumn wind that through the knotgrass blows
Blurs the sad gazer’s eye with unshed tears;
But autumn’s guest, who last year graced this plot,
Only, as yet, in dreams of night appears.
                           The wild geese from the North are now returning;
                           The dhobi’s thump at evening fills my ears.
                     Those golden flowers for which you see me pine
                     I’ll meet once more at this year’s Double Nine.

*

Seeking the Chrysanthemum
by Green Boy
                 The crisp day bids us go on an excursion—
                 Resistant to the wineshop door’s temptation—
                 Some garden, where, before the frosts, was planted
                 The glory of autumn, being our destination:
                 Which after weary walk having found, we’ll sing
                          An autumn song with unsubdued elation.
                          And you, gold flowers, if all the poet told
                          You understood, would not refuse his gold!

*

Planting the Chrysanthemums
by Green Boy
             Brought from their nursery and, with loving hands,
                   Planted along the fence and by the door —
         A shower last night their wilting leaves revived,
                  Opening the morning-buds all silver-hoar.
                   Sweet flowers! a thousand autumn songs I’ll sing
         To praise your beauty, and libations pour,
                  And water you, and ridge with earth around.
                   No dust on my wet well-path shall be found!

*

Admiring the Chrysanthemums
by Cloud Maiden
            Transplanted treasures, dear to me as gold—
            Both the pale clumps and those of darker hue!
            Rare-headed by your wintry bed I sit
            And, musing, hug my knees and sing to you.
        None more than you the villain world disdains;
            None understands your proud heart as I do.
        The precious hours of autumn I’ll not waste,
            But bide with you and savour their full taste.

*

Arranging the Chrysanthemums
by Cloud Maiden
             What greater pleasure than the lute to strum
             Or sip wine by your delicate display?
             To hold the garden’s fragrance in one vase,
                   And see all autumn in a single spray?
             On frosty nights I’ll dream you back again,
             Brave in your garden bed at close of day.
             Since with your shy disdain I sympathize,
    ’Tis you, not summer’s gaudy blooms I prize.

*

Celebrating the Chrysanthemums
by River Queen
                   Down garden walks, in search of inspiration,
         A restless demon drives me all the time;
             Then brush blooms into praises, and the mouth
             Grows scud-sweet, hymning those scents sublime.
             Yet easier ’twere a world of grief to tell
             Than to lock autumn’s secret in one rhyme.
             That miracle old Tao did once attain;
             Since when a thousand bards have tried in vain

*

Painting the Chrysanthemums
by Lady Allspice
             The brush that praised them, eager for more tasks,
             Would paint them now for painting’s no great cost
             When cunning black-ink blots the flowers’ leaves make,
             And white the petals, silvered o’er with frost.
             Fresh scents of autumn from the paper rise,
             And shapes unmoving by the wind are tossed.
             No need at Double Ninth live flowers to pluck:
                       These living seem, upon a fine screen stuck!

*
Questioning the Chrysanthemums
by River Queen
            Since none else autumn’s mystery can explain,
            I come with murmured questions to your gate:
                       Who, world-disdainer, shares your hiding-place?
            Of all the flowers why do yours bloom so late?
                       The garden silent lies in frosty dew;
            The geese return; the cricket mourns his fate.
                       Let not speech from your silent world be banned:
            Converse with me, since me you understand!

*

Wearing the Chrysanthemums
by Plantain Lover
                       Just to admire and not for our adornment
             Were these reared and arranged with so much care;
                       Yet young Sir Fop, with whom flowers are a passion,
             And drunk old Tao both dote on flowers to wear.
                       One’s head-cloth reeks of autumn’s acrid perfume;
             Chill dew of autumn pearls the other’s hair
             The vulgar crowd, which nothing understands,
             Stops in the street and, jeering, claps its hands.



*

The Shadow of the Chrysanthemums
by Cloud Maiden
                     The autumn moonlight through the garden steals,
      Filtered in patches variously bright.
           Flowers by the house as silhouettes appear;
           Flowers by the fence are flecked with coins of light.
                In the flowers’ wintry scent their souls reside,
                Not in those frost-forms, than a dream more slight.
                     Even the gross vandal, squinting through drunken eyes,
                     Can, by their scents, the crushed flowers recognize.
*

The Dream of the Chrysanthemums
by River Queen
                 Light-headed in my autumn bed I lie
                And seem to chase the moon across the sky.
                Well, if immortal, I’ll go seek old Tao,
                Not imitate Zhuang’s flittering butterfly!
                Following the wild goose, into sleep I slid;
                From which now, startled by the cricket’s cry,
                Midst cold and fog and dying leaves I wake,
                With no one by to tell of my heart’s ache.

*

The Death of the Chrysanthemums
by Plantain Lover
                The feasting over and the first snow fallen,
                The flowers frost-stricken lie or sideways lean,
                Their perfume lingering, but their gold hue dimmed
                And few poor, tattered leaves bereft of green.
                Now under moonlit bench the cricket shrills,
                And weary goose-files in the cold sky are seen.
                Yet of your passing let me not complain:
                 Next autumn equinox we’ll meet again!

*

Each poem was praised in turn, and the reading of the whole twelve concluded
amidst cries of mutual admiration.
‘Now just a moment!’ said Li Wan, interrupting their encomiums. ‘Let me first try to
give you an impartial judge?ment. I think there were good lines in all of the poems,
but comparing one with another, it seems to be that one is bound to place
“Celebrating the Chrysanthemums” first, with “Questioning the Chrysanthemums”
second and “The Dream of the Chrysanthemums” third. The titles themselves were
original, and - particularly in their treatment of the subject these are three highly
original poems. So I think that today the first place must undoubtedly go to River
Queen. After those first three I would place “Wearing the Chrysan?themums”,
“Admiring the Chrysanthemums”, “Arranging the Chrysanthemums”, “Painting the
Chrysanthemums” and “Remembering the Chrysanthemums” in that order.’
Bao-yu clapped his hands delightedly.
‘Absolutely right! A very fair judgement!’
‘I’m afraid mine aren’t really all that good,’ said Dai-yu. ‘They are a bit too
contrived.’
‘There’s nothing wrong with a bit of contrivance,’ said Li Wan. ‘One doesn’t want
the structure of a poem to stand out too ruggedly.’
‘I very much like that couplet of Cloud Maiden’s,’ said Dai-yu:

         ‘On frosty nights I’ll dream you back again,
         Brave in your garden bed at close of day.

It’s a technique that painters call “white-backing”. That mar?vellous couplet that
comes before it:

         To hold the garden’s fragrance in a vase,
         And see all autumn in a single spray

already sums up all there is to be said on the subject of flower? arrangement. You
feel that she’s left herself nothing else to say. So what does she do? She goes back to
the time before the flowers were arranged — before they were picked, even. That
going back in her “frosty nights’ couplet is a very subtle way of throwing the main
theme into relief, just as the artist’s white-backing sharpens the highlights on the
other side of the painting.’
Li Wan smiled.
‘That may be so; but your own “acrid-sweet” couplet is more than a match for it.’
‘I think Lady Allspice dealt with her subject most effect?ively,’ said Tan-chun. ‘That
couplet of hers:

             But autumn’s guest, who last year graced this plot,
             Only as yet in dreams of night appears

seems to bring out the idea of remembering so vividly.’
‘Well, your “head-cloth reeking of autumn’s acrid perfume” and “chill dew of
autumn pearling the hair” give a pretty vivid image of wearing chrysanthemums,’
said Bao-chai with a laugh.
‘And River Queen’s “who shares your hiding place?” “why do you bloom so late?”,’
said Xiang-yun, smiling mis?chievously, ‘make so thorough a job of questioning them,
that one feels the poor things must have been quite tongue-tied!’
‘For that matter,’ said Li Wan, entering into the spirit of the thing, ‘your persistent
haunting of the chrysanthemums — “sitting bare-headed by their wintry bed” and
“hugging your knees and singing to them”—makes one suspect that if the
chrysanthemums really had consciousness, they might, in the end, have grown just a
tiny bit tired of your company!’
The others all laughed.
‘I seem to be bottom again,’ said Bao-yu ruefully. ‘Though I must say I should have
thought that

        … to go on an excursion—
        Some garden where. . . was planted
                           The glory of autumn being our destination

and so forth was a perfectly satisfactory exposition of “seeking the chrysanthemums”;
and that

             A shower last night the wilting leaves revived,
             Opening the morning-buds all silver-hoar

dealt with the theme of transplanting chrysanthemums rather successfully. Heigh-ho!
I suppose it’s just that I couldn’t produce anything quite as good as River Queen’s
“acrid-sweet” line, or Cloud Maiden’s “bare-headed by your wintry bed”, or Plaintain
lover’s “reeking head-cloth” or “few poor, tattered leaves”, or Lady Allspice’s “autumn
guest in dreams of night appears”.
‘Well, never mind,’ he went on, after a moment’s reflection. ‘Perhaps tomorrow or
the day after, if I’ve got the time, I’ll try to do all twelve of them again on my own.’
‘Your poems were perfectly all right,’ said Li Wan consol?ingly. ‘It’s simply as you
yourself have just said that they didn’t have anything quite as good as the lines you
have men?tioned.’
Discussion of the poems continued a little longer, after which they called for another
lot of hot crabs and sat down at the large round table to eat them.
‘Eating crab-and admiring the cassia like this is itself a good theme for a poem, said
Bao-yu. ‘I’ve already thought of one. Is anyone else game to have a try?’
He quickly washed his hands and taking up a brush, wrote down the poem he had
thought of. The others then read what he had written:
            How delightful to sit and a crab’s claw to chew
            In the cassia shade — with some ginger-sauce, too
    Old Grim-chops wants wine, though he’s got no inside,
    And he walks never forwards, but all to one side.
            The ‘yolks’ are so tasty, who cares if we’re ill!
            Though our fingers we’ve washed, they are crab-scented still.
                 ‘O crabs,’ Dong-po said (and his words I repeat)
                 ‘You have not lived in vain if you’re so good to eat!’


‘One could churn out that sort of poem by the dozen,’ said Dai-yu.
‘You’ve used up all your inspiration,’ said Bao-yu; ‘but instead of admitting that you
can’t write any more, you make rude remarks about my poem!’
Dai-yu made no reply, but tilted her head back, lifted up her eyes, and for some
minutes could be observed muttering softly to herself; then, picking a brush up, she
wrote out the follow?ing poem rapidly and without hesitation:

             In arms and in armour they met their sad fate.
             How tempting they look now, piled up on a plate!
             The white flesh is tasty, the pink flesh as well—
             Both the white in the claws and the pink in the shell;
             And we’re glad he’s an eight- not a four-legged beast
             When there’s plenty of wine to enliven the feast.
             So with crab let us honour the Double Ninth Day,
             While chrysanthemums bloom ’neath the cassia’s spray.

Bao-yu had read this and was just beginning to say how good he thought it was when
Dai-yu impetuously tore it up and told one of the servants to take away the pieces
and burn them.
‘It’s not as good as yours,’ she said. ‘It deserves to be burnt. Actually yours is very
good — better even than the chrysanthe?mum ones. You ought to keep it to show
people.’
‘I’ve thought of one too,’ said Bao-chai. ‘It was rather a struggle, so I’m afraid it
won’t be very good; but I’ll write it down anyway for a laugh.’
Then she wrote down her poem, and the others read it.

             With winecups in hand, as the autumn day ends,
             And with watering mouths, we await our small friends.
             A straightforward breed you are certainly not,
             And the goodness inside you has all gone to pot—

There were cries of admiration at this point.
‘That’s a very neat bit of invective!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I can see I shall have to burn my
poem now!’
They read on.

                  For your cold humours, ginger; to cut out your smell
                  We’ve got wine and chrysanthemum petals as well.
                  As you hiss in your pot, crabs, d’ye look back with pain
                  On that calm moonlit cove and the fields of fat grain?

When they had finished reading, all agreed that this was the definitive poem on the
subject of eating crabs.
‘It’s the sign of a real talent,’ they said, ‘to be able to see a deeper, allegorical
meaning in a frivolous subject — though the social satire is a trifle on the harsh side!’
Just then Patience arrived back in the Garden.
But what then ensued will be told in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 39

An inventive old county woman tells a story of somewhat
questionable veracity
And an impressionable young listener insists on getting to
the bottom of the matter

PATIENCE, you will recall, had just returned to the party.
‘What’s happened to your mistress?’ the others asked her.
‘Why doesn’t she come back and join us?’
‘She hasn’t got time,’ said Patience, laughing. ‘She’s sent me to ask if you’ve got any
crabs left. She says she didn’t get a proper chance to eat any earlier on, and as she
hasn’t got time to come here herself, would I ask you, if you’ve still got any, to let me
take a few back for her.’
‘We’ve got plenty left,’ said Xiang-yun, and gave orders for ten of the largest to be
put in a box for her to take.
‘Pick as many as you can with the round “navels”,’ said Patience to the old servant
who was departing to do Xiang?-yun’s bidding.
Li Wan tried to make Patience sit down with them, but she refused.
‘You shall sit down!’ said Li Wan, eyeing her skittishly; and taking her by the hand,
she drew her down beside her and held a cup of wine up to her lips so that she was
forced to drink. Patience gulped down a mouthful of it and then rose again to go.
‘I won’t let you go!’ said Li Wan. ‘The only person you ever take any notice of is that
precious Feng of yours; you think you don’t need to obey me; but you shall.’ She
turned to the old woman, now waiting in readiness with the box of crabs, and told
her to go on ahead with them and tell Xi-feng that Patience was being detained. The
old woman went away.
She returned a short while after, still carrying the box, with a message.
‘Mrs Lian says thank you very much, and she hopes you didn’t think her greedy for
asking. She’s put some caltrop?-cakes and some chicken-fat rolls in the box, that have
just been sent her by the elder Lady Wang. She thought you and the young ladies
might like to try them.’
There was a further message for Patience:
‘Mrs Lian says she thought she sent you to fetch something for her, not to stay here
and amuse yourself. Anyway, she says, tell her not to drink too much.’
‘Oh,’ said Patience, laughing, ‘and what will happen to me if I do?’
As if in defiance of her mistress’s instructions, she fell to eating and drinking with
great gusto. Li Wan meanwhile encircled her waist in an affectionate embrace.
‘What a pity that so distinguished-looking a young woman should have been born
to so humble a fate!’ said Li Wan. ‘It’s you who should have been the mistress. You
would have made such a good lady. No one who didn’t know would ever take you for
a maid.’
Patience, who had continued eating and drinking with Bao-chai and Xiang-yun while
Li Wan was saying this, now turned round and looked at her with a giggle.
‘Stop it, Mrs Zhu! You’re tickling me!’
‘Aiyo!’ said Li Wan. ‘What’s this great hard thing here?’
‘Keys,’ said Patience.
‘Keys?’ said Li Wan. ‘What has your mistress got so pre?cious that you need to
carry keys round all the time? Do you know what I tell people about you? I tell them:
Just as you can’t imagine a Tripitaka going off to India to fetch the scriptures without
his white horse or a Liu Zhi-yuan conquer?ing the Empire without a Spirit of the
Melon Fields to give him his armour, so you can’t imagine a Wang Xi-feng without a
Patience alongside helping her. You are your mistress’s master-key. What does she
need to make you carry these things around with you for?’
Patience laughed embarrassedly.
‘You are making fun of me, Mrs Zhu. I’m afraid you’ve had too much to drink.’
‘No, it’s true,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Whenever we start gossiping about personalities, we
nearly always end up by agreeing what exceptional people you and the other chief
maids are. And all exceptional in your own different ways, too— that’s what’s so
interesting.’
‘It’s almost as though Nature had in each case designed the mistress and the maid
to suit each other,’ said Li Wan. ‘Take Grandmother and Faithful, for example.
Grandmother would be completely lost without Faithful. Who in the family from Lady
Wang downwards would ever dare answer Grandmother back? Yet Faithful does. And
what’s more, Grandmother will listen to her. And look at all the things that
Grandmother has. No one else could ever remember them the way that Faithful can.
Just think how Grandmother would be plundered and cheated if Faithful weren’t
there to look after them. And on top of it all, she’s a very fair person. She’ll often put
in a good word for someone. And though she has so much influence with
Grandmother, she never, never uses it to do anyone else down.’
Xi-chun smiled.
‘Yesterday when Grannie was talking about Faithful she said, “She’s better than all
you grandchildren!”’
‘Faithful’s a good sort,’ said Patience. ‘I don’t consider my?self in her class at all.’
‘Mother’s Suncloud is a good, honest soul,’ said Bao-yu.
‘She certainly is,’ said Tan-chun. ‘She’s got a mind of her own, though. You know
what a Holy Buddha Mother is: she doesn’t notice a half of what goes on around her.
But Sun-cloud does. And she is the one who always has to remind Mother about
everything. She even knows about outside mat?ters. When Father is at home, it’s
Suncloud who has to remind Mother about them when she forgets.’
‘I don’t know about Mother and Suncloud,’ said Li Wan, ‘but what about this young
gentleman here?’ She pointed to Bao-yu. ‘Can you imagine the sort of state he would
be in if he hadn’t got his Aroma to look after him? And Feng too. Even though she’s a
regular Tyrant King, she still needs her Patience in order to be so efficient, just as
much as the real Tyrant King needed his two strong arms in order to be able to lift up
those hundredweight tripods.’
‘There were four of us when I first came here with Mrs Lian,’ said Patience, ‘but the
others all either died or left. I’m the only one who’s stayed with her all along.’
‘You’re lucky then,’ said Li Wan. ‘And Feng is lucky, too. When I first came here to
Mr Zhu, I had several maids, too, but — I don’t know why it was, for I’m sure you
wouldn’t call me a hard mistress — they were always dissatisfied. So when Mr Zhu
died, I took advantage of their being still young to get rid of them all. If only I’d had a
dependable girl like you that I could have kept on with me, I shouldn’t feel quite so
helpless now.’
Her eyes began to redden as she said this, and she seemed about to cry.
‘Oh, come now!’ said the others. ‘There’s no need to upset yourself. If you’re going
to be like this, we might just as well break up the party.’
They did in fact begin washing their hands then and pre?sently decided to go off in a
body to pay their duty calls on Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang. Meanwhile the old
women and maids busied themselves with sweeping out the pavilion and stacking
and washing up the cups and dishes.
Aroma left in the company of Patience. On the way back she asked Patience into
Green Delights. She made her sit down and invited her to take tea, but Patience
declined, saying that she would drop in another time, and rose to go. Aroma had
something to ask her, however, and called after her as she was going.
‘What’s happened to this month’s allowances?’ she said. ‘Even Her Old Ladyship’s
and Her Ladyship’s people haven’t had theirs yet.’
Patience spun round when she heard this and came back again.
‘Don’t ask me about that, please!’ she said in a low, agit?ated voice, after first
glancing round to make sure that no one else was present. ‘Whatever it is, you’ll only
have another day or two to wait, I promise you.’
Aroma was amused to see her so agitated.
‘Why, what’s the matter? Why should you be in such a state about it?’
Patience dropped her voice even lower.
‘Mrs Lian has already put the money for this month’s allow?ances out at interest.
She’s waiting for the interest on some of her other loans to pay your allowances with.
It’s all right for me to tell you this, but whatever you do, don’t let anyone else know
about it!’
Aroma laughed.
‘But she’s not short of money, she’s got plenty. What does she want to go giving
herself all this extra worry for?’
‘She’s certainly not short of money,’ said Patience. ‘Just in the few years since she
started doing this, the amount she has got out on loan must have grown to several
hundred times the original premium. And she doesn’t spend all of her own
allow?ance, either. Whenever she’s got nine or ten taels saved up out of it, she
invests them too. Why, just her profits alone after she’s deducted the allowances
from the interest must be in the region of a thousand taels a year.’
‘You and your mistress are a nice pair, I must say!’ said Aroma. Keeping the rest of
us short while you use our money to feather your own nests with!’
‘That’s most unfair!’ said Patience indignantly. ‘Any way, I’m sure you can’t really be
short of money.’
‘Not myself, it’s true’ said Aroma. ‘In any case, I haven’t got anything to spend it on.
I was thinking more of my young gentleman. I like to keep some by me in case he
ever needs any.’
‘Look, if you’re in urgent need of money, I’ve got a few taels put by myself that I can
let you have,’ said Patience. ‘You can have them as an advance on this month’s
allowance, if you like.’
‘I don’t really need any at the moment,’ said Aroma, ‘but may I take you up on your
offer if I ever do?’
‘Of course,’ said Patience, and left without further cere?mony.
Outside the courtyard gate a maid from Xi-feng was look?ing for her.
‘The Mistress wants to see you about something.’
‘What has she got so urgent that she has to keep pestering me like this?’ said
Patience. ‘I’ve just had Mrs Zhu all over me to make me stay and talk to her. It’s not
as if I’d run away.’
‘Better ask her yourself,’ said the girl. ‘It wasn’t my idea to fetch you.’
‘Cheeky devil!’ said Patience, and continued on her way.
When she got there, however, it was not Xi-feng she found waiting for her, but the
old countrywoman she had admitted on a previous occasion as a suppliant, Grannie
Liu, with her little grandson Ban-er. They were sitting in the side room on the kang
with Zhang Cai’s wife and Zhou Rui’s wife on either side of them, while maids were
emptying sacks of jujubes, melons and other farm produce on the floor below. The
company rose hurriedly to their feet as Patience entered. Grannie Liu, who
recognized her from her last visit, scrambled down from the kang and greeted her at
once as ‘Miss Patience’ without any of the previous time’s confusion.
‘The family all send their regards, Miss. They’d have come themselves long since to
see you and pay their respects to their Aunt Lian, only they’ve been too busy with
the farm-work. Anyways, they’ve had a good harvest this year, thanks be, and it’s
been a good year for the fruit and vegetables. This here that I’ve brought is the first
pickings. We didn’t like to sell them, because we wanted our first-fruits to go to Mrs
Lian and the young ladies. We thought that mayhap eating the rarities of earth and
sea every day of their lives they might sometimes tire of delicate food and fancy a bit
of plain country stuff for a change. Anyway, there you are! It’s a poor gift, but it’s
given with a warm heart!’
‘It’s very good of you to have brought it,’ said Patience, and begged her to be
seated, sitting down herself as she did so. She invited Zhou Rui’s wife and Zhang Cai’s
wife to be seated as well, and ordered one of the junior maids to pour tea.
Mesdames Zhou and Zhang chaffed her on her appear?ance.
‘You’ve got the spring in your face, Miss. Your eyes are all red.’
Patience laughed.
‘I know. I don’t drink normally, but today Mrs Zhou and the young ladies got hold of
me and just forced it down me. I was made to drink, against my will. That’s why my
face is so red.’
‘Well I don’t know,’ said Zhang Cai’s wife. ‘Here’s me just dying for a drink, but
nobody offers me one. Next time anyone invites you, Miss, you must take me with
you.’
The others laughed.
‘I saw those crabs this morning,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘Great big things. There
couldn’t have been more than two or three to a catty. And I should think altogether
there must have been seventy or eighty catties in those hampers. Even so,’ she said
reflectively, ‘there probably wouldn’t have been enough for all the staff to have
some.’
‘Lots of them didn’t,’ said Patience. ‘It was only the top ones that got one or two
crabs to themselves. The rest of them only got a taste - some of them not even that.’
‘Good crabs like that are selling at a pennyweight a catty this year,’ said Grannie Liu.
‘If one catty is a pennyweight, fifty catties is two taels ten, and another thirty is one
and ten; ten and two is twelve and twice ten is a tael, that’s thirteen, and then
there’s the wine and the other dishes. It couldn’t have cost less than twenty taels in
all. Bless us and save us that’d keep a farmer and his family for a year!’
‘I take it you’ve already seen Mrs Lian,’ said Patience.
‘Yes,’ said Grannie Lu. ‘She told us to wait.’
She glanced through the open window as she said this and noticed that the day was
drawing on towards evening.
‘It’s getting dark earlier these days,’ she said. ‘We’d better be on our way. We don’t
want to find the city gates shut, or we shall be in a proper pickle.’
‘Just wait while I slip over and find out what the Mistress is up to,’ said Zhou Rui’s
wife. She left the room and was gone for some considerable time. When she
eventually returned, she was full of smiles.
‘It’s Grannie’s lucky day,’ she said. ‘She’s struck lucky with both of them.’
‘How do you mean?’ said Patience.
‘Well,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife, ‘Mrs Lian was with Her Old Ladyship when I got there,
so I went up to her and told her on the side that Grannie wanted to go now to make
sure of getting to the gates in time. “Oh” she said, “she came such a long way with all
that stuff. If it’s getting late, she’d better spend the night here and leave tomorrow
morning.” Well, that was one piece of luck; but that’s nothing to what fol?lowed,
because Her Old Ladyship had overheard this and asked her who this “Grannie Liu”
was, and when Mrs Lian told her, she said, “Oh, I’ve been just longing for someone
with a bit of age and experience to talk to! Bring her here! Introduce her to me!”
Now that really was a stroke of luck!’
She urged Grannie Liu to leave her place on the kang and go over to the other
apartment; but the old countrywoman was seized with a sudden attack of shyness.
‘Look at me! Dear soul, I’m in no fit state to see her now! Tell her I’ve already left!’
‘Go on, you go and see her!’ said Patience. ‘It’ll be all right. Our old lady is always
very nice to poor or elderly people She’s not the least bit pretentious or stuck-up like
some I could mention. If you’re nervous about meeting high-ups, Mrs Zhou and I will
go with you to give you confidence.’
She proceeded, with Mrs Zhou’s assistance, to conduct the old woman to her
interview.
When they saw Patience coming out of the courtyard, the pages on duty at the gate
stood up, and two of them came run?ning up to her.
‘Miss! Miss!’
‘What’s it this time?’ said Patience.
‘I’ve been waiting to catch you for hours, Miss,’ said the first of the boys. ‘My ma’s
took ill and I’ve got to go and fetch the doctor for her. Will it be all right if I take the
night off?’
‘You’re a nice lot!’ said Patience. ‘It’s my belief that you’ve got it all worked out
between you so that one of you gets a holiday every day. And instead of telling the
Mistress properly, as you’re supposed to do, you come round to me with these sad
stories and make me take the responsibility. When Stoppo did this the other day, the
Master called for him while he was still away and I got into trouble by speaking jip for
him. The Master accused me of doing favours. And now you want to do the same
thing.’
‘His ma really is ill, Miss,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘I’m sure it would be in order for you
to let him go.’
‘All right, then. But mind you’re back first thing tomorrow,’ Patience told the boy.
‘Now you heard that, didn’t you? First thing. Because I’ve got work for you to do. No
lying in bed until you can feel the sun on your backside! And I want you to take a
message to Brightie for me on the way. Tell him the Mistress says that if he hasn’t
handed in the test of that interest by tomorrow, she won’t ask him for it again,
because she’ll know that he’s keeping it for himself.’
The boy promised to deliver the message and scampered off, delighted to be
released.
By the time Patience and her charges arrived at Grand?mother Jia’s apartment, all
the young denizens of Prospect Garden had for some time been assembled there in
attendance, so that as Grannie Liu entered the room, she was confronted by a bevy
of unfamiliar young ladies, all resplendent in orna?ments of pearl and kingfisher, like
a bed of beautiful flowers, none of which she could give a name to. In their midst a
venerable old lady reclined on a couch. A young woman, pretty as a picture and
dressed in silk and satin from top to toe, sat behind her, gently pounding her legs.
Xi-feng, the only person there she could recognize, was standing to one side of her,
evidently in the midst of telling her something amusing. Deducing that the old lady
on the couch must be Grandmother Jia, Grannie Liu hurried up to her and made her
an antique curtsey.
‘Your servant, my lady!’
Grandmother Jia inclined herself politely from the couch and asked Zhou Rui’s wife to
bring up a chair for her to sit on. Ban-er, bashful as ever, would not attempt a
greeting.
‘Now, old kinswoman,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘and what would your age be?’
‘Seventy-five this year,’ said Grannie Liu.
Grandmother Jia turned round to the others present.
‘That’s several years older than me. Fancy still being so fit and lively Heaven only
knows what I shall be like at that age!’
Grannie Liu laughed.
‘I was born for a hard life, d’ye see, just as Your Ladyship was born for a soft one.
We couldn’t all be like Your Ladyship, or there’d be no one to do the farming.’
‘Are your eyes and teeth still good?’ Grandmother Jia asked her.
‘All bar a back tooth on the left-hand side that’s getting a bit loose this year.’
‘There! and I’m already a useless old woman,’ said Grand-mother Jia. ‘Poor eyesight,
poor hearing, memory going — I can’t even remember the names of old kinsfolk like
yourself any longer. I’m scared to meet them when they come visiting, for fear they
might laugh at me. There’s not much I can do nowadays except eat — what I can get
my teeth into — and sleep. Apart from that, I share a joke or two with these young
people when I need a bit of diversion, and that’s about all.’
‘Your Ladyship is lucky,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘I couldn’t have such a life if I wanted it.’
‘Lucky? No!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’m just an old crock!’
The others all laughed.
‘Our Feng has been telling me that you’ve brought a lot of fruit and vegetables with
you,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’ve asked the servants to bring them over. I’m so looking
forward to some nice, fresh farm vegetables. The stuff we buy outside isn’t as tasty
as your home-grown stuff, you know.’
‘That’s the countryman’s idea of a treat,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘He can’t afford meat and
fish, so when he fancies a little luxury, he likes to eat his food fresh from the ground.’


‘Now that you’re one of the family,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘I hope you will stay long
enough to enjoy your visit. Don’t go hurrying back again. Stay here a couple of days
or so, if you can put up with us. We’ve got a garden too, you know, and we grow a
certain amount of fruit in it. Tomorrow you must try some of our stuff and you must
take some back home with you when you go. It will seem more like a proper visit to
rela?tions if you stay a bit, instead of popping in and popping straight out again.’
Xi-feng could see that Grandmother Jia took pleasure in the old woman’s company
and added her own persuasion.
‘It’s probably not as roomy here as your farmyard, but I expect we’ll manage to
tuck you in somewhere. And you’ll be able to tell our old lady all the village gossip.’
‘Feng!’ said Grandmother Jia, laughing in spite of herself. ‘Don’t make fun! She’s a
simple countrywoman. You can’t expect her to stand up to your teasing in the way
that we can.’
She gave orders for Ban-er to be given some sweetmeats. He was unwilling to eat in
front of so many people, however, so she told them to give him some money instead,
and to get some of the younger pages to take him outside to play.
After Grannie Liu had taken tea, she regaled Grandmother Jia with some anecdotes
of village life, thus further endearing herself to her new acquaintance. She was still
holding forth when Xi-feng, who had slipped out some time previously, sent
someone round to invite her back for dinner. Grandmother Jia selected some food
from her own dishes and sent them to Xi-feng’s place for Grannie Liu to try in
addition to what Xi-feng was giving her.
Xi-feng could see that Grandmother Jia had taken a fancy to the old woman, so after
dinner she sent her back to Grandmother Jia’s apartment. As soon as she arrived,
Faithful ordered some of the older domestics to conduct her to a bath. She herself
went off to fetch her a change of clothes. She selected two fairly modest items from
her own wardrobe and sent them to the bathroom with instructions that Grannie Liu
should change into them after her bath. Such goings-on were outside even the old
grannie’s extensive experience, but she took them all in good part, and having
submitted to the ordeal of the bath, quickly dressed herself in the proffered clothes
and went in to take her place once more beside the couch and resume her role of
raconteuse. In this she was eminently successful, since Bao-yu and the girls, now
seated on all sides around her, found her simple country talk much more fascinating
than any of the fictions told by the blind ballad-singers who sometimes visited the
house.
Indeed, there was more than an element of fiction in what she told them: for
Grannie Liu, though born and bred in the country, was a shrewd old soul to whom
the years had given a pretty good understanding of human weakness, and when she
sensed the old lady’s pleased excitement and the avid atten?tion of her younger
listeners, she did her best not to disappoint them by supplying from her own
invention whatever memory and experience were inadequate to provide.
‘We country-folk working out there on the land — year in, year out, rain or fine,
spring, summer, autumn and winter — we never get any time off,’ she told them. ‘If
we rest, it’s only as you might say ‘napping in harness’, like the old post-horse in the
story. And many a strange happening do we see, out there on the land.
‘Take what happened last winter, for instance. It had been snowing for several days
without a stop and the snow was two or three feet thick on the ground, and this
particular morn?ing I rose up early, and while I was still indoors, I heard the sound of
something stirring outside in the woodpile. I thought to myself, “That’ll be someone
stealing the firewood.” So I put my eye to the hole in the shutter, and sure enough
there was someone there; but it wasn’t anyone from the village.’
‘It was probably some traveller,’ Grandmother Jia inter?rupted. ‘He was feeling cold
and helped himself to a bit to make a fire with, so that he could get warm.’
‘Ah, but it wasn’t a traveller,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘That was the strange thing about it.
Now who do you think it was, my old soul? ’Twas a young woman, seventeen or
eighteen years of age seemingly, pretty as a picture, and with no more on her but a
red dress and a white satin skirt, and the hair on her bare head combed as sleek and
shining as black lacquer paint—’
At that point her story was interrupted by a confused hub?bub of voices outside. One
of them could be heard above the rest saying, ‘It isn’t serious. There’s no point in
frightening Her Old Ladyship.’
‘What is it?’ the old lady asked in some alarm.
‘A fire has broken out in the South Court stables,’ said one of the maids. ‘It isn’t
serious, though. They’ve already got it under control.’
Always the most timorous of mortals where fire was con?cerned, Grandmother Jia
struggled to her feet, and supported by the maids, led the others out onto the loggia
to see what was happening. Somewhere beyond the south-east corner of the
courtyard the glare of flames was still distinctly visible. Terrified out of her wits, she
began calling on the names of the Buddha, and hurriedly sent someone to burn
incense before the image of the Fire God.
By now Lady Wang had arrived with the younger women, and added her voice to the
others’ in assuring the old lady that the fire was well under control and urging her to
go indoors; but Grandmother Jia insisted on staying outside until the last of the
flames had been extinguished.
As soon as they were all inside again, Bao-yu began ques?tioning Grannie Liu about
her interrupted story.
‘Why was the girl out in all that snow stealing firewood?’ he asked her. ‘She might
have caught her death of cold.’
‘For goodness’ sake don’t ask about that!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It was talking
about firewood that started that fire just now. Think of something else to talk about
for goodness’ sake!’
Though privately far from satisfied, Bao-yu was obliged to let the matter rest while
Grannie turned her inventive faculties in another direction.
‘In a farmstead east of ours there was an old dame of more than ninety who had
fasted and prayed to the Buddha every day of her life. At last the Blessed Guanyin
was moved by her prayers and appeared to her one night in a dream. ‘It was to have
been your fate to be cut off without an heir,’ the Blessed Mother told her, ‘but
because of your great piety, I have peti?tioned the Jade Emperor to give you a
grandson.’
‘Now this old dame had an only son, and the son, too, had an only son who in spite
of all their care had died when he was only seventeen or eighteen, to their sore and
bitter grief. But after she had this dream a second grandson was born. He’d be
thirteen or fourteen now — a very handsome lad, with skin as white as snow, and
that sharp and clever you’d hardly credit it. So you see there are gods and Buddhas
watching over us, whatever folk may say!’
The circumstances of this tale so perfectly accorded with the idea they had privately
formed of their own situation, that both the senior ladies in her audience — Lady
Wang no less than Grandmother Jia — were quite captivated by it. But Bao-yu,
whose thoughts were still on the beautiful pilferer of fire?wood, looked glum and
preoccupied. His sister Tan-chun observed this and sought to distract him.
‘We’ve got to make some sort of return for Cousin Shi’s party, Bao. Why don’t we
go back now and discuss when the next poetry meeting is to be? We can have our
party for Cousin Shi at the same time, and Grandma will be able to come and look at
the chrysanthemums.’
‘Grandma’s already promised to give a return party for Cousin Shi herself,’ said
Bao-yu, ‘and we are all invited. We’d better wait until that’s over before putting on
anything of our own.’
‘The longer we delay, the colder the weather will be,’ said Tan-chun. ‘It won’t be
much fun for Grandma if it’s too cold.’
‘But she loves parties when it’s raining or snowing,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Why don’t we
wait until the first snowfall and have it then? Call it a snow-viewing party. Think how
romantic: chanting poems in the falling snow!’
‘It would be more romantic still,’ said Dai-yu drily, ‘if instead of chanting poems we
had a big bundle of firewood and took it in turns to tiptoe through the snow and pull
out sticks from it.’
Bao-chai and the other girls all laughed, but Bao-yu stared at Dai-yu rather crossly
and said nothing.
After the company had dispersed, Bao-yu finally managed to get Grannie Liu into a
corner and question her in detail about the mysterious snow maiden. Grannie Liu’s
inventive?ness was once more put to the test.
‘On the embankment that runs along the north side of our land,’ she said, ‘there is
a little shrine. The image inside it is not a god or a Buddha, though. There used at
one time to be a gentleman living in our parts—’
She broke off at this point and appeared to be trying to remember a name.
‘Never mind his name,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Don’t try to remem?ber it. Just tell me what
happened.’
‘This gentleman had no son, but he had an only daughter called — I think it was
Ruo-yu. She could read books as well as any scholar, this Ruo-yu, and the gentleman
loved her more than all the treasure in the world. But sad to say, she took sick and
died when she was only seventeen years old—‘
Bao-yu groaned and stamped his foot.
‘So what happened then?’
‘Because the gentleman loved her so dearly, he had this shrine built for her out in
the fields and had a likeness of her made out of wood and clay to put inside it; and
he arranged for someone to burn incense there and always keep a spark of fire going
inside the burner. But as the years went by, both the gentleman and the people who
used to tend the shrine for him all died, and now the shrine is falling into ruin and
the statue has come to life and started haunting people.’
‘No, no,’ Bao-yu interrupted hurriedly, ‘that wouldn’t be the statue coming to life.
People like that are never really dead, even after they have died.’
‘Holy Name!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘Fancy that now! And me thinking all along it was
the statue. Well, whatever it is, every so often it takes on human shape and goes
wandering abroad troubling people. And that’s what I saw when I looked out that
time and saw someone taking our firewood. The people in our village are talking of
breaking up the image and knocking the shrine down so as to put a stop to the
haunting.’
‘Good gracious! they mustn’t do that!’ said Bao-yu. ‘That’s a terrible sin, knocking a
temple down!’
‘Now I am glad you told me that,’ said Grannie Liu gravely. ‘When I get hack, I shall
do my best to stop them.’
‘My grandmother and Lady Wang and in fact just about everyone in this family is
terribly keen on good works,’ said Bao-yu. ‘There’s nothing they like better than
repairing temples and restoring things. Tomorrow I’ll write out an appeal and collect
some subscriptions for you. You can be the fund’s Treasurer, and when we’ve got
enough money together, you can supervise the restoration, And I’ll get them to send
you some money every month for incense, How would that be?’
‘Statue or spirit or whatever she is,’ said Grannie Liu, ‘I shall certainly be grateful to
her for the money.’
Bao-yu pressed her for the names of the nearest farms and villages and the exact
location of the shrine in relation to them as well as the distance to it and the general
direction in which it lay. Answering all these questions with whatever came first into
her head, Grannie Liu supplied a set of fictitious direc?tions which Bao-yu, believing
them to be genuine, carefully committed to memory and carried back to his room,
where he lay awake half the night planning what he would do for the beautiful
wood-thief in the days ahead.
He went out of the Garden first thing next morning, and handing Tealeaf a few
hundred cash, told him the directions for getting to the shrine as given him by
Grannie Liu the night before, and instructed him to follow them, inspect the shrine,
and report back on what he saw. He would await Tea-leaf’s report before deciding
what to do next.
But once Tealeaf had gone he found the waiting very tedious, and as the day wore on
and Tealeaf still failed to return, he became as fidgety as a worm on hot earth. He
was obliged to wait until sundown before Tealeaf finally came back. When he did,
however, he was looking extremely pleased with himself.
‘You managed to find it then?’ Bao-yu asked him eagerly. ‘Yes,’ said Tealeaf, smiling
broadly, ‘but you couldn’t have heard the directions right. I had a terrible job finding
it. The place where it is and the way to it are nothing like you said. That’s why I took
so long. I was all day looking for it. In the end I found that there is a ruined temple in
that area, but it’s not where you said: it’s at the east end of the north embank?ment,
on a corner.’
Bao-yu’s face beamed with pleasure.
‘ Grannie Liu’s a very old woman,’ he said. ‘It’s quite pos?sible that she
misremembered when she gave me those direc?tions. Anyway, tell me what you
saw.’
‘The temple was south-facing, like you said,’ Tealeaf re?plied, ‘and it was in a very
tumble-down condition. I’d been searching neatly all day by then, so of course when I
saw that, I was very relieved and hurried straight inside. But oh lot! when I looked at
the image, I was so scared I hurried straight out again it was so real!’
Bao-yu laughed delightedly.
‘Of course. If she’s capable of coming to life, you’d expect a certain liveliness in the
Statue.’
‘She?’ said Tealeaf. ‘This was no she. It was an ugly great Plague God with a blue
face and red hair!’
‘Useless dolt!’ said Bao-yu angrily. ‘You can’t even do a simple little errand like this
for me.’
‘That’s most unfair,’ said Tealeaf in a deeply aggrieved tone of voice. ‘You send me
off on a wild-goose chase to look for something you’ve read about in some book or
other or heard about in some old-wives’ tale, and then when I can’t find it (because
there’s probably no such thing any way) you start abusing me.’
Bao-yu saw that he had hurt his feelings, and hastened to comfort him.
‘There, there, don’t be upset! Some time when you’re not too busy you shall have
another look for it. If the old woman is deceiving us, you naturally won’t be able to
find it. But if there really is such a place and you do, then you will have a share in the
merit when it’s restored. And of course, I shall give you a very big reward.’
While he was talking to Tealeaf, one of the pages from the inner gate came up and
said that ‘one of the young ladies from Her Old Ladyship’s room’ was at the gate
asking for Master Bao.
Who it was and what she wanted will be revealed in the fol?lowing chapter.




CHAPTER 40

Lady Jia holds two feasts in one day in the Prospect Garden
And Faithful makes four calls on three dominoes in the
Painted Chamber



HEARING that he was wanted, Bao-yu hurried to the gate of the inner mansion.
Amber was standing in front of the screen-wall waiting for him.
‘Hurry! You’re holding everyone up. There’s something they want to talk to you
about,’ she said.
In fact, when he arrived at his grandmother’s room, she and his mother and the girls
were already discussing it ‘it’ being the question of what arrangements they should
make for the return party for Shi Xiang-yun.
‘I’ll tell you what to do,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Since there won’t be any outsiders at this
party, instead of having a fixed menu and formally-laid tables, why not get them to
do one or two of everyone’s favourite dishes, put them in those lacquer food-boxes
that have different compartments for the different dishes, and serve them on little
individual tables with a “self-service” wine-kettle each, so that everyone can pour
their own wine? I’m sure that would be jollier than a formal party.’
Grandmother Jia was much taken with this proposal and at once sent orders to the
kitchen to do as he had suggested.
‘Tell them that tomorrow we want them to choose some of the things they know
we like and put them in boxes - one box for each of us. And tell them that we shall
want lunch served in the Garden tomorrow as well.’
The lamps had by now been lit. Of the night which followed our record gives no
account.
Rising early next morning, they were delighted to observe that it was going to be a
beautiful clear, autumn day. Li Wan was among the earliest up, and at once began to
supervise the older women and maids in sweeping up fallen leaves, polish?ing chairs
and tables, and getting ready the sets of teacups, winecups and so forth that would
be needed for the party. Xi-feng’s maid Felicity, accompanied by Grannie Lin and little
Ban-er, arrived while they were in the midst of this activity.
‘You are very busy, Mrs Zhu,’ said Grannie Liu.
Li Wan smiled.
‘I told you you’d never get away! You kept saying yesterday that you had to go, but I
knew they wouldn’t let you.’
‘It was Her Old Ladyship that kept me,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘She said she wanted me to
enjoy meself for a day or two be?fore I went back.’
Felicity produced several large keys.
‘Mrs Lian says the little tables already in use may not he enough and we’d better
open the upstairs storeroom and get some more out, just for today. She meant to
come over herself and see to it, but she’s with Her Ladyship at the moment and can t
get away, so she says would you mind Opening the store?room for her and getting
some of the servants to carry them down?’
Li Wan sent Candida to the storeroom with the keys and told one of the old women
to go to the inner gate and get some of the pages on duty there to help with the
carrying. She herself went and stood in the courtyard behind Prospect Hall and
watched from below while the Painted Chamber was opened up and the tables were
one by one carried down from it. The team of maids, pages and old nannies worked
together with such enthusiasm that soon more than twenty of the little tables had
been manhandled downstairs into the courtyard.
‘Gently now, gently!’ said Li Wan as they were moving them. ‘No need to go at it as
if all the devils in hell were after you! You’ll chip the edges off them if you’re not
careful.’
She turned to Grannie Liu.
‘Wouldn’t you like to go up and have a look?’
The old woman needed no second asking. Holding Ban-er tightly by the hand, she
scrambled up the stairway and looked inside. The interior was stacked high with
folding screens, tables, chairs, lanterns and furniture of every kind. Much of what she
saw she could not identify, but the dull gleam of gold, the rich glow of coloured
lacquers, and the artistry and sump?tuousness of the objects drew many a pious
ejaculation from her before she descended. The door of the storeroom was then
locked and the remaining maids came down.
‘I wonder how energetic Lady Jia will be feeling today,’ said Li Wan. ‘Perhaps while
you are about it you had better get out the oars and punt-poles and paddles and
some boat-awnings as well, in case she decides to go on the water.’
‘Yes’m,’ said the maids, and proceeded to unlock the store?room again and carry
down the items specified. Li Wan mean?while sent one of the pages to tell the
boatwomen that they were to pole a couple of punts out from the boathouse and
have them by in readiness.
While this activity was still in progress, Grandmother Jia arrived at the head of a
troupe of females. Li Wan hurried for?ward to greet her.
‘You are very energetic this morning, Grandmother; I didn’t expect you in the
Garden so soon. I was hoping that you would still be doing your hair. I’ve picked some
chrysan?themums for you to wear and I was just about to send them round to you.’
Even as she was saying this, Casta arrived carrying a large dish of peacock-green glaze
shaped like a lotus-leaf, in which chrysanthemum-flowers of many different colours
were being kept in moisture. Grandmother Jia chose a dark red one to fasten in the
side of her hair. As she turned her head to do so, she caught sight of Grannie Liu and
smiled at her in welcome.
‘Come over here! You must have one too!’
Before she had finished, Xi-feng had already seized the old woman by the hand and
was dragging her over.
‘Come on, let me dress you up properly!’
She began sticking the chrysanthemums into her hair, put?ting them in at every angle,
and continued until all the flowers in the dish had been used up. The effect was so
ludicrous that Grandmother Jia and the rest all burst out laughing. Grannie Liu, not a
whit perturbed, good-humouredly joined in the laughter.
‘I don’t know what my poor old head can have done to deserve so much honour,’
she said.
‘You ought to pull them out and throw them in her lace,’ said the others. ‘She’s
made you look like an old vamp!’
‘I may be getting on now,’ said Grannie Liu, ‘but I used to be a stylish young woman
in my time. I loved to have a bit of powder for my cheek and a flower to wear in my
hair. ‘Tis no matter: now I shall be a stylish old ‘un.’
During this exchange they had been moving towards Drenched Blossoms Pavilion.
Maids went on ahead with a rolled-up patterned rug which they spread out on one of
the bench-boards that ran along the inner sides of the balustrades. Seating herself on
the rug with her back against the railings, Grandmother Jia invited Grannie Liu to sit
down beside her and tell her what she thought of the Garden.
‘Holy Name!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘You know, we country folk like to get a picture at
the New Year that we can stick up on the wall. Every year just before New Year the
farmers come into town to buy one. Many’s the time of an evening when the day’s
work was done we’ve sat and looked at the picture on our wall and wished we could
get inside it and walk around, never imagining that such beautiful places could really
be. Yet now I look at this Garden here, and it’s ten times better than any picture I
ever saw. If only I could get someone to make a painting of it all, just the way it is,
that I could take back to show the others, I do believe I should die content!’
Grandmother Jia smilingly pointed a linger in Xi-chun direction.
‘You see my little great-niece over there? She can paint. Shall we get her to do you
a painting of it?’
Grannie Liu jumped up and going over to Xi-chun, took her impulsively by the hand.
‘Dear Miss!’ she said. ‘To think that one so young and pretty should be so gifted
and all! I do believe you must be one of the holy spirits born in a human shape!’
The simple earnestness with which this was uttered made the others all laugh. After
resting a little longer, Grandmother Jia, who intended to show her guest as much of
the Garden as possible, got up again and resumed the tour.
The first place they came to was the Naiad’s House. The green bamboos engulfed
them as they entered the gate and brilliant green moss carpeted the ground beneath.
Through the midst of the bamboos a raised cobbled path wound its way towards the
house. Grannie Liu stepped aside to let Grandmother Jia and the rest walk on it while
she herself walked on the ground below. Amber held a hand out to draw her up.
‘Walk on the path, Grannie! You’ll slip on the moss down there.’
‘Don’t you mind me, my dear!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘I’m used to it. You keep to the
path, though, with the rest. You don’t want to muddy those fancy shoes of yours.’
Unfortunately the necessity of looking up to talk to some?one who was walking at a
higher level had distracted her attention from the ground beneath, and even as she
said this, her feet slipped on the treacherous moss, her legs flew out from under her,
and she landed on her posterior with a thump. The girls clapped their hands
delightedly. Grandmother Jia laughed too, though trying her hardest to sound cross.
‘Little monsters!’ she said, ‘Don’t just stand there laughing. Help her up!’
But Grannie Liu bad already scrambled up unaided, and was laughing herself.
‘It serves me right,’ she said. ‘I shouldn’t have spoken so soon!’
‘Are you sure you haven’t hurt your back?’ Grandmother Jia asked her. ‘Let one of
the maids massage it for you.’
‘God bless my soul!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘I’m not that deli?cate! I don’t suppose a day
goes by but what I take a tumble or two. If I was to have meself massaged every time,
it would never
Nightingale was already waiting with the bamboo blind raised for them to enter.
Grandmother Jia led her party through the doorway and sat down inside. Dai-yu
waited on her in person; offering her tea in a covered cup which she carried on a
little tray.
‘We shan’t be taking tea, niece,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Don’t bother to pour for the rest
of us.’
Hearing this, Dai-yu ordered one of the maids to fetch the chair by the window that
she normally sat on herself and bring it up for her aunt to sit on. Grannie Liu noticed
the inkstone and brushes on the table in front of it and all the books on the
bookshelves and said that she supposed this must be ‘the young gentleman’s study’.
Grandmother Jia smiled and pointed to Dai-yu.
‘It belongs to her - my little granddaughter.’
As though incredulous, Grannie Liu studied Dai-yu atten?tively for some moments in
silence.
‘It doesn’t look at all like a young lady’s room,’ she said finally. ‘It looks to me like a
very high-class young gentleman’s study.’
‘Where is Bao-yu, by the way?’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘He’s on the lake in one of the punts,’ said the maids.
‘Oh? Whose idea was it to get the punts out?’ she asked.
‘It was my idea,’ said Li Wan hurriedly. ‘It occurred to me just now when we were
getting things out of the storeroom that you might perhaps feel like going on the
water today.’
Grandmother Jia was about to make some comment when Aunt Xue’s arrival was
announced and she rose up, together with the rest of the company, to welcome her.
‘Aren’t you energetic today, Lady Jia!’ said Aunt Xue smilingly when all were seated
once more. ‘Here already!’
‘We were just discussing what sort of fine to impose on late arrivals,’ said
Grandmother Jia teasingly. ‘We didn’t have you in mind, of course!’
A certain amount of good-humoured banter followed. In the course of it
Grandmother Jia chanced to notice that the gauze in Dai-yu’s windows was faded,
and drew Lady Wang’s attention to it.
‘This kind of gauze looks very well on a window when it’s new,’ she said, ‘but after a
while it loses its greenness. Green isn’t a suitable colour for the windows here in any
case. There are no peach or apricot trees outside to make a contrast when they are in
flower, and there is already enough green in all those bamboos. I seem to remember
that we used to have four or five different shades of window gauze somewhere or
other.
You must look some out tomorrow for her and have this changed.’
‘The other day when I had to open the silk-store,’ said Xi-feng, ‘I came across a lot
of rose-coloured “cicada wing” gauze in a long wooden chest. It was a beautiful fresh
colour and the material was beautifully soft and light. I don’t think I’ve ever seen any
quite like it before. I’d like to have taken a couple of lengths of it for facing quilts with.
I’m sure it would make lovely quilts.’
‘Pooh!’ said Grandmother Jia scornfully. ‘I thought you were supposed to be such
an authority on materials — and you can’t even name a gauze properly! You’re not as
clever as you thought, my girl! You’ll have to watch your tongue a bit in future.’
Aunt Xue put in an extenuating word for her niece, while laughing with the rest at
her discomfiture.
‘However much of an authority she may be, I’m sure she would never presume to
compete with you, Lady Jia. If she is wrong about the gauze, you must give her the
benefit of your greater experience and put her right. I am sure the rest of us would
like to know too.’
‘As a matter of fact that gauze is a good deal older than any of you here,’ said
Grandmother Jia, ‘so it is not very surpris?ing that Feng mistook it for cicada wing.
There is a certain resemblance, and cicada wing is what anyone would most likely
take it to be who hadn’t seen it before. The proper name for it, though, is “haze
diaphene”.’
‘What a pretty name!’ said Xi-feng. ‘I must have seen several hundred different
gauzes in my time; but I must con?fess I’ve never heard that name mentioned
before.’
Grandmother Jia laughed.
‘And what great age have you now reached, my dear, to be talking so freely about
your vast experience? Haze diaphene used to come in four colours: “clear-sky blue”,
“russet green”, “pine green” and “old rose”. Hung up as bed-curtains or pasted in
windows it looks from a distance like a coloured haze. That’s why they called it “haze
diaphene”. The old rose kind is sometimes called “afterglow”. You won’t find fabric
made as fine or as soft as that nowadays, not even among the gauzes made for the
Imperial Household.’
‘Never mind about Feng,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘I’ve never heard about this kind of gauze
before either.’
While they continued to talk about it, Xi-feng sent someone to fetch a piece from the
storeroom.
‘That’s right, that’s it!’ said Grandmother Jia when it arrived. ‘When we first had it,
we used it only for covering windows with, but later on we began experimenting and
found that it made very good quilts and bed-curtains as well. Get a few lengths of it
out tomorrow. You can use the “old rose” kind to re-cover these windows with.’
Xi-feng promised to see to it. Meanwhile the others were examining the gauze and
admiring its quality. Grannie Liu was particularly impressed, uttering a whole series of
‘Holy Names’ as she subjected it to close and careful scrutiny. ‘I could never hope to
get anything as good as this to make a dress with,’ she said. ‘It seems a terrible waste
to use it on windows.’
‘Actually it isn’t much good for clothing,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘What about this, then?’ said Xi-feng, pulling out a flap of the quilted crimson gauze
dress she was wearing underneath her jacket and holding it up for them to see.
‘Yes, very fine,’ said Grandmother Jia, examining it. ‘Ah, yes, now there you are!
This is a modern Imperial Household gauze; but you see it’s still not as good as that
one there.’
‘Well, what do you make of that?’ said Xi-feng. ‘That one there is only an “Official
Use” fabric, yet this one I’m wear?ing, which isn’t as good quality, is “Imperial
Household” !’
‘Anyway, have another look tomorrow,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I think you’ll find
that besides the “old rose” pieces you saw in that chest, there’s a lot of “clear-sky
blue” somewhere as well. If there is, get it all out; give a length of it to our
kins?woman here; I should like two lengths myself for a set of bed-hangings; and any
left over can be matched with suitable lining-material and made up into waistcoats
for the girls. There’s no point in keeping it until it gets mildewed.’
Xi-feng, having first promised that she would do all these things, told the servant who
had brought the sample to take it back to the storeroom.
‘We’re a bit cramped in here,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Let’s move on to somewhere
else now.’
‘They say that “great families live in great houses”,’ said Grannie Liu, ‘and truly,
when I first went into Your Lady?ship’s apartment yesterday and saw those great
chests and cupboards and tables and beds, the size of everything fairly took my
breath away. That great wardrobe of yours is higher and wider than one of our rooms
back home. I’m not sur?prised you keep a ladder in the back courtyard. When I first
saw it, I thought to myself, “Now what can they need a ladder for? They don’t ripen
things on the roofs as we do, so it can’t be for that.” And then of course I realized: it
must be for getting things out of the compartment on top of that ward-robe of yours,
for you could never reach it else. And yet this place here, for all it’s so much smaller,
seems to me more per?fect than your big one. The things here are all so pretty. I
don’t know what they are, some of them, but the more I look at them, the less I want
to leave!’
‘There are other pretty places besides this,’ said Xi-feng. ‘We’re taking you to see
them all.’
As they left the Naiad’s House, they could make out, at some distance from where
they stood, a number of people punting on the lake. Remarking that since the boats
were al?ready out they might just as well use them, Grandmother Jia conducted her
little party in the general direction of Amaryllis Eyot and Flowery Harbour. Before
they had reached the water’s edge, however, a number of elderly women
ap?proached, each bearing one of those large summer food-boxes of the kind they
make in Soochow, with tops and bottoms of varicoloured lacquer-work delicately
patterned in needle-en?graving of gold, and panels of gilded bamboo basket-work in
their sides. Seeing them approach, Xi-feng asked Lady Wang where she wanted lunch
to be laid.
‘Ask Grandmother,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Wherever she wants it, of course.’
Grandmother Jia, who had been moving on, now turned back to tell them.
‘Your Cousin Tan’s would be a nice place to have it. You go on ahead and lay it there,
and the rest of us will follow by boat.’
Xi-feng, accompanied by Li Wan, Tan-chun, Faithful and Amber, led the women with
the lunch-boxes by a short cut to the Autumn Studio. They put out a couple of tables
there in the Paulownia Room.
‘We’re often hearing how the gentlemen at their parties outside have a buffoon to
provide them with their laughs,’ said Faithful while they were getting ready. ‘Today
we’ve got a buffoon of our own — a female one.’
Li Wan, being a good, simple soul, did not understand what she meant; but Xi-feng
knew immediately that she was referring to Grannie Liu and gleefully agreeing that
they should have some laughs at the old woman’s expense, at once began plotting
something with Faithful.
‘You two are awful!’ Li Wan protested laughingly. ‘Anyone would think you were a
couple of mischievous children. And what will Lady Jia say?’
‘Don’t worry, Mrs Zhu!’ said Faithful. ‘You won’t be involved in this one little bit. I
promise to keep you out of it.’
Grandmother Jia now arrived with the others, the company sat down informally, and
maids went round and served every one with tea. When they had all finished their
tea, Xi-feng came in carrying a bundle of silver-tipped and silver-ornamented ebony
chopsticks wrapped in a West Ocean linen napkin, and proceeded to lay the places.
‘Put that little yellow cedar-wood table next to my place so that Mrs Liu can sit by
me,’ said Grandmother Jia.
As the maids hastened to comply, Xi-feng tipped a wink at Faithful, who took the
opportunity presented by this diver?sion to draw Grannie Lu aside and quietly brief
her on the decorums to be observed by anyone eating with the family.
‘It’s part of the rules of this household,’ she told tile old woman in conclusion. ‘If
you don’t do it properly, they will laugh at you.’
The places being now all laid, the company sat down to table, with the exception of
Aunt Xue, who had eaten already and continued sitting where she was, drinking tea.
Bao-yu, Xiang-yun, Dai-yu and Bao-chai sat at one of the two large tables with
Grandmother Jia at their head, and Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun sat at the other
one, presided over by Lady Wang. Grannie Liu had a little table of her own next to
Grandmother Jia.
Normally when Grandmother Jia took her meals it was the junior maids who stood
with spittoons, fly-whisks and napkins in their hands behind the chairs. Faithful had
long since graduated from such menial duties. On this occasion, how?ever, she
borrowed a fly-whisk from one of the younger girls and did some whisking herself.
This was a signal for the other maids, who knew that something was afoot, to melt
discreetly away, leaving the stage clear for Faithful. Fly-whisk in hand, Faithful took
up a position on her own and darted a question?ing glance at her victim.
‘All right, Miss, don’t worry!’ said Grannie Liu, and hav?ing settled herself in her
place, picked up her chopsticks. She found them extremely heavy and unwieldy. They
were a pair of old-fashioned, square-handled ivory ones inlaid with gold, which
Xi-feng and Faithful had planted on her in furtherance of their plan.
‘What’s this you’ve given me?’ said Grannie Liu. ‘A pair of tongs? These are heavier
than one of our iron shovels. I shall never be able to manage with these.’
The others all laughed.
A woman-servant now entered carrying one of the luncheon?boxes and stood in the
middle of the room holding it while a maid removed the lid. There were two dishes
inside. Li Wan took out one of them and set it down on Grandmother Jia’s table. The
second, a bowl of pigeon’s eggs (deliberately chosen for their mirth-provoking
possibilities) was taken out by Xi-feng and set down in front of Grannie Liu.
‘Please!’ said Grandmother Jia, waving her chopsticks at the food as a polite
indication that they should begin. At once Grannie Liu leaped to her feet and, in
ringing tones, recited the following grace:
     ‘My name it is Liu,
     I’m a trencherman true;
     I can eat a whole sow
     With her little pigs too.’

Having concluded, she puffed out both her cheeks and stared in front of her with an
expression of great determina?tion.
There was a moment of awestruck silence; then, as it dawned on them that they
really had heard what they thought they had heard, the whole company, both
masters and ser?vants, burst out into roars of laughter.
Shi Xiang-yun, unable to contain herself, spat out a whole mouthful of rice.
Lin Dai-yu, made breathless by laughter, collapsed on the table, uttering weak ‘Aiyos’.
Bao-yu rolled over, convulsed, on to his grandmother’s bosom.
Grandmother Jia, exclaiming helplessly ‘Oh, my heart!’ ‘Oh, my child!’, clung tightly to
her heaving grandson.
Lady Wang pointed an accusing finger at Xi-feng, but laughter had deprived her of
speech.
Aunt Xue exploded a mouthful of tea over Tan-chun’s skirt.
Tan-chun planted a bowlful of rice on the person of Ying-?chun.
Xi-chun got up from the table and going over to her nurse, took her by the hand and
asked her to massage her stomach.
The servants were all doubled up. Some had to go outside where they could squat
down and laugh with abandon. Those who could control themselves sufficiently
helped the casual?ties to mop up or change their clothes.
Only Xi-feng and Faithful remained straight-faced through?out this outburst, politely
urging Grannie Liu to begin. Mani?pulating the unwieldy chopsticks with
considerable difficulty, the old woman prepared to do so.
‘Even your hens here are special,’ she remarked. ‘Such pretty little eggs they lay! I
must see if I can’t get one of these under me belt!’
Under the impact of these remarks the company’s composure, which it had only just
recovered, once more broke down. Grandmother Jia, abandoning any attempt at
self-control, was now actually weeping with laughter. Amber, who feared a seizure,
pounded her energetically on the back.
‘That wicked devil Feng is behind this,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Don’t believe a thing
she tells you!’
‘They cost a silver tael apiece,’ said Xi-feng, as Grannie Liu continued to praise the
diminutive ‘hen’s’ eggs. ‘You should eat them quickly, while they’re still hot. They
won’t be so nice when they’re cold.’
Grannie Liu obediently held out her chopsticks and tried to take hold of one, but the
egg eluded her. After chasing it several times round the inside of the bowl, she did at
last suc?ceed in getting a grip on it. But as she craned forward with open mouth to
reach it, it slipped through the chopsticks and rolled on to the floor. At once she laid
down the chopsticks, and would have gone down on hands and knees to pick it up,
but before she could do so one of the servants had retrieved it and carried it off for
disposal.
‘That’s a tael of silver gone,’ Grannie Liu said regretfully, ‘and we didn’t even hear
the clink!’
The others had by now lost all interest in eating, absorbed by the entertaining antics
of their guest.
‘Who got those chopsticks out?’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘They’re not meant for
occasions like this; they’re for using at formal banquets. Whoever it was, I expect it
was that wicked Feng who put them up to it. Take them away at once and get her
another pair!’
The servants had in point of fact had nothing to do with the chryselephantine
chopsticks, which had been smuggled in at the last moment by Faithful and Xi-feng;
nevertheless, on hearing the order, they obediently came forward and replaced them
with a silver and ebony pair like those that had been provided for the rest.
‘Out goes gold and in comes silver!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘But when all’s said and done,
our wooden ones at home are han?dier.’
‘If there’s any poison in what you are eating,’ said Xi-feng, ‘the silver will tell you by
changing colour.’
‘If this food is poisoned,’ said Grannie Liu, ‘then what we eat at home must be pure
arsenic. Anyway, I intend to eat it all, come what may!’
Delighted to have found someone who, besides being so amusing, had so evident a
relish for her food, Grandmother Jia insisted on making all her own portion over to
Grannie Liu and ordered one of the older women to go round with a pair of
chopsticks and a bowl and make a selection from all the dishes to give to little Ban-er.
Presently, when they had finished eating, Grandmother Jia and the others moved
into Tan-chun’s bedroom for a chat, while in the Paulownia Room the servants
cleared away the remains of the meal and hastily relaid a table for Li Wan and Xi-feng.
Grannie Liu, who had lingered behind, observed them sitting down at opposite sides
of it to begin their meal. She was greatly impressed by this glimpse of the upper-class
etiquette which requires young married women to eat on their own when the rest
have finished.
‘What I like best of all here,’ she said, ‘is your way of doing things. I’m not surprised
they say that “good breeding is to be found in great houses”.’
The compliment was sincerely meant, but Xi-feng under?stood it in a different sense.
‘I do hope we haven’t hurt your feelings,’ she said. ‘It was only a joke, you know.’
The words were scarcely out of her mouth when Faithful came hurrying in.
‘Please don’t be offended, Mrs Liu. I’ve come in to apolo?gize.’
‘Bless you, I’m not offended!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘We were only cheering up Her
Ladyship, dear old soul. What should I be offended for? I knew when you told me to
say those things it was only for a laugh. If I’d felt offended, I should never have said
them.’
A chastened Faithful turned angrily on the other servants. ‘Come on! Why aren’t you
pouring Mrs Liu some tea?’ ‘That’s all right,’ said Grannie Liu hurriedly. ‘I’ve had some
already. I drank the tea that the young woman handed to me a while ago. You get on
with your own lunch, Miss. Don’t mind me!’
Xi-feng took Faithful by the hand.
‘Yes, eat now with us. It’ll keep you out of mischief.’ Faithful sat down and one of
the old women laid another bowl for her and another pair of chopsticks. When the
three young women had finished, Grannie Liu, who had been watching them,
remarked on how little they had eaten.
‘None of you here seems to eat more than a bite or two,’ she said. ‘It’s a marvel to
me you’re not famished. No wonder you all look as if the wind could blow you over!’
‘There is a lot left over today,’ Faithful commented. ‘Where are all the others?’ she
asked the old serving-woman.
‘They’re still here in waiting, Miss,’ said the old woman. ‘They’re not off duty yet.
We can give it to them, if you like, before they go.’
‘They’ll never finish all this lot,’ said Faithful. ‘Pick out a couple of bowlfuls and take
them to Patience in Mrs Lian’s room.’
‘No need,’ said Xi-feng. ‘She’s had her lunch already.’
‘If she can’t eat it herself, she can give it to the cat,’ said Faithful.
The old woman put the contents of two of the dishes into a box and carried it off to
give Patience.
‘Where’s Candida?’ said Faithful.
‘She’s in there eating with the rest,’ said Li Wan. ‘What do you want her for?’
‘It’s all right,’ said Faithful. ‘Nothing.’
‘Aroma isn’t here,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Why don’t you send her a couple of dishes?’
Faithful gave orders for this to be done. She inquired of the remaining old women
whether the boxes for the drinking party were ready yet.
‘I think they’ll be a while yet,’ said one of them.
‘Hurry them up a bit, will you?’ said Faithful, and the old woman went off to do her
bidding.
The young women, accompanied by Grannie Liu, now went into Tan-chun’s room,
where Grandmother Jia and the others were chatting and laughing together.
This room, a three-frame apartment which Tan-chun, who loved spaciousness, had
left undivided, had in the midst of it a large rosewood table with a Yunnanese marble
top piled high with specimen-books of calligraphy and littered with several dozen
miscellaneous ink-stones and a small forest of writing-brushes standing in
brush-holders and brush-stands of every conceivable shape and size. On one side of
the table was a bucket-sized ‘pincushion’ flower-vase of Ru ware stuck all over with
snow-white pompom chrysanthemums. On the west wall of the room hung a
‘Landscape in Mist and Rain’ by Mi Fei, flanked by a pair of scrolls bearing a couplet
written by the Tang calligrapher Yan Zhen-qing:

   My heart has discovered true ease amidst the clouds and mists of the
mountains;
   My life has gained a fierce freedom from the rocks and torrents of the fells.

Against the wall beneath was a long, high table. On it, to?wards the left, stood a large
Northern Song porcelain dish heaped with those ornamental citrus fruits they call
‘Buddha’s hands’, whose brilliant yellow contrasted agreeably with the greenish blue
of the glaze. To the right a white jade chime in the form of a two-headed fish hung in
a varnished wooden frame to whose side a tiny hammer was attached. Ban-er, whom
growing familiarity was making bolder, was with diffi?culty restrained from
unfastening the hammer and striking the fish with it. He then said that he wanted
one of the ‘yellow things’ to eat, and Tan-chun selected a Buddha’s hand from the
dish and gave it to him.
‘There you are,’ she said, ‘but it’s only to play with. It isn’t good to eat.’
On the opposite side of the room was a large four-poster bed whose silk gauze
hangings had a pattern of bright green plants and insects in reversible embroidery.
Ban-er ran over to it and began identifying the insects:
‘That’s a cricket. That’s a grasshopper
Grannie Liu dealt him a hefty slap:
‘Little varmint! Who said you could go running around putting your dirty hands on
everything? Just because you’ve been allowed in to have a look, it doesn’t mean you
have to start getting above yourself.’
The blow had been hard enough to make him cry, and it took the combined efforts of
the others present to comfort him.
Meanwhile Grandmother Jia had been looking through the gauze-covered windows
into the courtyard behind.
‘Those paulownias by the verandah eaves are still very fine,’ she remarked. ‘It’s a
pity they’ve begun losing their leaves.’
A little gust of wind blew across the courtyard as she spoke, bearing on it a faint
strain of music from outside.
‘That must be a wedding,’ she said. ‘I didn’t realize we were so near to the street
here.’
‘You could never hear the street from here, Mother,’ said Lady Wang, laughing.
‘Those are our twelve little actresses rehearsing.’
‘If they’re going to be playing anyway,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘we may as well have
them to play in here. It will be entertainment for us and it will make an outing of
sorts for them.’
Xi-feng at once ordered the troupe to be summoned, and made hurried
arrangements for a long table to be brought in, that the actresses could sit down to
perform at, and covered with a red rug.
‘Much better put them in Xi-chun’s water pavilion,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘The
music will sound even better coming across the water. Later on when we take our
wine we can sit in the downstairs of the Painted Chamber. It’s nice and open there
and close enough to the pavilion for listening to the music from.’
Everyone agreed that this would be a good idea.
Grandmother Jia now turned with a smile to Aunt Xue.
‘I think we’d better be on our way now. These young people don’t much like having
visitors, you know. They are terrified of getting their rooms dirty. We mustn’t be
tactless and overstay our welcome. I think we’d better take another little turn in the
boats now, and then it will be just about time to go and have our drinks.’
‘How unfair!’ said Tan-chun laughing. ‘When I ask you or Mother or Aunt Xue to
come here, you never do.’
‘Oh, my little Tan is all right,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It’s those two Yus who are so
detestable. We shall go and brawl in their rooms later on when we are drunk!’
The others (including the detestable Yus) all laughed.
Emerging in a single group from the Autumn Studio, they arrived after a short walk at
Duckweed Island, where their specially imported Soochow boatwomen were waiting
with two elegantly decorated punts. Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang, Aunt Xue, Grannie
Liu, Faithful and Silver were handed one by one aboard the first one. They were
joined a little later by Li Wan, and finally by Xi-feng, who stood in the bows and said
she was going to punt.
‘Feng!’ Grandmother Jia called nervously from inside the cabin. ‘It’s too dangerous
to fool about. It isn’t like the open river here, but it’s still quite deep. Come in here
with us!’
‘It’s all right, Grannie! Don’t be nervous!’ said Xi-feng, laughing, as she shoved off
from the bank. But the punt, being somewhat overloaded, was hard to manage, so
that by the time they were in midstream she was already in difficulties and had to
hand the pole over to one of the boatwomen and sit down rather abruptly on her
haunches.
When their elders were safely away, Bao-yu and the six girls got into the second punt
and were poled along in the wake of the first one. The maids and older women
proceeded in the same direction on foot along the shore.
These raggedy-looking lotus-leaves everywhere are rather ugly,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I can’t
think why they haven’t been cleared away.’
‘Now when could they have been?’ said Bao-chai. ‘With parties being held here
practically every day this autumn, the Garden has never been free long enough.’
‘I can’t abide the poems of Li Shang-yin,’ said Dai-yu, ‘but there is just one line of
his that I am rather fond of:

Leaves but dead lotus-leaves for the rain to play on.

Trust you not to “leave the dead lotus-leaves”!’
‘It is a good line, I agree,’ said Bao-yu. ‘We’ll tell them that in future they are not to
remove them.’
They were drifting into Flowery Harbour now, and the dank chill of its creeper-hung
grotto seemed to penetrate their bones. Dead reeds and dying caltrop-leaves added
to the autumnal melancholy of the scene. A clean, airy-looking build?ing was visible
at some distance beyond the bank above.
‘Isn’t that Bao-chai’s place?’ said Grandmother Jia.
On being told that it was, she asked the women to moor the boats there, and having
disembarked, ascended from the landing-stage by a flight of cloud-shaped stone
steps and proceeded, with the rest of the party, to the gateway of Allspice Court.
A delectable fragrance assailed their nostrils as they en?tered. Outside the house the
leaves of the mysterious, un?namable creepers had turned an even intenser green in
the colder weather, and where before there had been flowers, there now hung
trusses of the most beautiful coral-red berries. Indoors, however, it was stark and
bare. The only decoration in Bao-chai’s room was a vase of the cheaper kind of Ding
ware on the table, with a few chrysanthemums in it. Apart from the flowers there
were only a few books and some tea?-things on the table. The bed-hangings were of
black gauze, and the quilts and covers were of the same forbidding plain?ness as the
hangings.
‘This child is really too self-effacing!’ Grandmother Jia mut?tered, evidently
shocked by what she saw. The tone in which she addressed Bao-chai was a somewhat
reproachful one: ‘If you haven’t any things of your own, why ever didn’t you as your
Aunt Wang for some? I’m afraid I never thought about it before. Of course. I realize
now. You must have left all your stuff behind in Nanking.’
She at once ordered Faithful to supply Bao-chai with some Ornaments, and then
turned, with some asperity, on Xi-feng.
‘Really, Feng! I do think it rather stingy of you! Couldn’t you have spared your
cousin a few knick-knacks?’
Lady Wang and Xi-feng both laughed.
‘She said herself that she didn’t want any. We gave her some things, but she sent
them all back again.’
Aunt Xue corroborated this.
‘She was just the same in Nanking, Lady Jia. She’s never cared much for that sort of
thing.’
Grandmother Jia shook her head.
‘That will never do. It saves trouble, no doubt, to keep one’s room so bare. But
what would any of our relations think if they were to come here and see this?
Besides, it isn’t natural for a young girl to be so austere. If girls are to live so austerely,
what sort of a stable ought an old woman like me to live in? Think of the descriptions
of young ladies’ boudoirs you find in plays and romances such exquisite refinement
of luxury! I’m not exactly suggesting that you should emulate them — but you
shouldn’t fall too far short, all the same. After all, when the things are there for the
asking, it seems silly not to use them. Use them sparingly, by all means, if your tastes
are on the austere side; but don’t dispense with them alto?gether! I’ve always had
rather a flair for decorating interiors. I don’t exercise it much nowadays, because I’m
too old; but I think the girls have inherited a little of it from me. The thing one always
has to be on one’s guard against is bad taste - which generally means no more than
arranging good things in a bad way. I don’t think any of my girls has bad taste. Now
why don’t you let me decorate this room for you? I promise you it shall look both
dignified and austere. There are still a few things tucked away in my dowry that
Bao-yu doesn’t know about. (I wouldn’t let him see them, or they’d have disappeared
long ago!).’
She called Faithful to her and instructed her what to bring. ‘I want you to fetch that
bonseki and the little screen and the little tripod of smoky agate. Those three things
arranged on the table here will be enough. There’s also a set of white satin hangings
hand-painted in black ink. I’d like you to get them too and put them up in place of
these bed-curtains.’
‘Yes, madam,’ said Faithful. ‘But these things are all stored in the attic over the east
wing and I’m not sure which chests they’re in, so it will take me quite a while to find
them. Can’t I leave it until tomorrow?’
‘Tomorrow or the day after tomorrow is immaterial,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘as long
as it gets done.’
After sitting for a while longer in Bao-chai’s room, they got up and again moved on to
the covered area underneath the Painted Chamber. élégante and the other little
actresses came forward to make their curtseys and to inquire what pieces they
should play.
‘Choose a few of the ones you are most familiar with,’ said Grandmother Jia, and
the little actresses went off to the Lotus Pavilion. No further mention of them is
made in this part of our narrative.
Supervised by Xi-feng, the servants had by now completed the seating arrangements
for the drinking-party. Two wooden couches covered with woven grass mats and
embroidered cushions had been placed side by side at the head. Each had a pair of
carved lacquer tables in front of it. On one of each pair there was an incense set — a
miniature metal vase, a miniature cassolette and a miniature tripod, all for burning
different kinds of incense in - on the other was a large lacquer box. These two
couches with a pair of tables each were for Grandmother Jia and Aunt Xue.
Of the places ranged below them only one, Lady Wang’s, had a couch and two tables;
all the rest had one table and a chair. On the east side, nearest to Grandmother Jia,
sat Grannie Liu with Lady Wang below her; on the west side Xiang-yun had been laid
first, nearest to Aunt Xue, then Bao-chai, then Dai-yu, then Ying-chun, then Tan-chun,
then Xi-chun, with Bao-yu in the very last place of all. A table and chairs had been
laid for Li Wan and Xi-feng between the inner and outer mosquito screens which
protected those inside the room from the insects of the lake.
The little lacquer tables were of many different shapes — some four-lobed like a
begonia leaf, some five-lobed like plum-flowers, some shaped like multi-petalled
sunflowers, some like lotus leaves, some square, some round - and the lacquer boxes
were designed to match the shapes of the tables. Everyone had his own nielloed
silver ‘self-service’ wine kettle and a little polychrome cloisonné winecup.
‘Well now,’ said Grandmother Jia when they were all seated, ‘let’s have a cup or
two to warm up on, and after that I think it would be more fun if we played a
drinking game.’
‘I am sure you know lots of good ones,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘but what about the rest of
us? I am afraid this is just a trick to make us all drunk. We might just as well drink the
extra cups now, since we’re bound to lose anyway, and forget about the game!’
‘ Come, Mrs Xue, you’re being excessively modest all of a sudden!’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘But perhaps you think I’m too old for this sort of thing?’
‘No, no, no. And I’m not being modest, either,’ said Aunt Xue, laughing. ‘I am afraid
of not being able to give the answers and making a fool of myself.’
‘Even if we can’t give the answers,’ said Lady Wang, ‘it only means drinking a few
more cups of wine. And if we get drunk, we can go to bed. No one is going to laugh at
us, I hope!’
Aunt Xue smiled and nodded.
‘Very well, I shall do as I am told then. But I think Lady Jia ought to drink a cup first,
as proposer of the game.’
‘Of course,’ said Grandmother Jia, and drained off a cup forthwith.
Xi-feng stepped forward into their midst to make a proposal:
‘If you are going to play a drinking game, may I suggest that you have Faithful as
your M. C.?’
The others, knowing that when Grandmother Jia played drinking games it was
generally Faithful who helped her out, agreed readily to this proposal, whereupon
Xi-feng went to fetch Faithful and drew her into their midst.
‘If Faithful is going to be our M.C.,’ said Lady Wang, ‘we can’t possibly have her
standing up all the time.’ She turned to one of the little maids behind her: ‘Put a chair
for her over there, will you, where Mrs Zhu and Mrs Lian are sitting.’
When the chair had been brought, Faithful, offering polite resistance, allowed herself
to be propelled towards it, and having first apologized for the liberty of doing so, sat
down. At once she established her authority by drinking a bumper-cup.
‘Right,’ she said. ‘The rules of drinking are as strict as the rules of war. Now that
you’ve made me your M. C., any of you who doesn’t do exactly as I say, no matter
who it is, has to pay a forfeit.’
‘Agreed, agreed,’ said the others. ‘Hurry up and tell us what the game is.’
Before she could do so, Grannie Liu, waving her hand in protest, got up and began to
go.
‘’Tisn’t right to make sport of folks like this. I’m going home!’
‘No, no, we can’t have that!’ said the others, laughing.
‘Back to the chair with her!’ Faithful shouted to the younger maids. They complied
gleefully, seizing the old woman on either side and marching her back to her seat.
‘Let me off this game!’ she pleaded, as they forced her into it; but Faithful was
adamant.
‘Another word from you,’ she said, ‘and you’ll be made to drink a whole kettleful as
a punishment.’
Grannie Liu’s protests then ceased.
‘What I’m going to do,’ said Faithful, ‘is to call threesomes with the dominoes,
starting from Her Old Ladyship, going round in an anti-clockwise direction, and
ending up with Mrs Liu. First I shall make a separate call for each of the three
dominoes and after that I shall make a call for the whole three?some, so you’ll get
four calls each. Every time I call, you’ve got to answer with something that rhymes
and that has some connection with the call. It can be something from a poem or
song or ballad, or it can be a proverb or some well-known expression anything you
like as long as there is a connection and it rhymes.’
‘Good!’ said the others approvingly. ‘That’s a good game. Let’s have a call then.’
‘Right,’ said Faithful. ‘Here comes the first one.’ She laid down a double six. ‘On my
left the bright blue sky.’
‘The Lord looks down from heaven on high,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘Bravo!’ said the others.
The second domino was a five-six.
‘Five and six together meet,’ said Faithful.
‘By Six Bay Bridge the flowers smell sweet.’
‘Leaves six and ace upon the right.’
‘The red sun in the sky so bright,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘Altogether that makes: “A shock-headed devil with hair like tow”,’ said Faithful.
‘The devil shouts, “Zhong Kui, let me go!”,’ said Grand?mother Jia.
Amidst laughter, and applause for the successful completion of her turn, she picked
up and drained her winecup.
‘Here comes the next one,’ said Faithful, laying down a double five. ‘On my left all
the fives I find.’
‘Plum-blossoms dancing in the wind,’ said Aunt Xue.
‘On my right all the fives again,’ said Faithful.
‘Plum-blossoms in the tenth month’s rain,’ said Aunt Xue.
‘Between them, two and five make seven.’
‘On Seventh Night the lovers meet in heaven.’
‘Together that gives: “The Second Prince plays in the Five Holy Hills”.’
‘The immortals dwell far off from mortal ills.’
Again there was applause, and Aunt Xue drank her wine.
‘Next threesome coming up,’ said Faithful. ‘All the aces, one and one.’
‘Two lamps for earth, the moon and sun,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘On my right once more aces all.’
‘And flowers to earth in silence fall,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Between them, ace again with four.’
‘Apricot trees make the sun’s red-petalled floor,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Together that makes nine ripe cherries.’
‘Winged thieves have stripped the Emperor’s trees of ber?ries,’ said Xiang-yun, and
drank her wine.
‘A pair on the left then, three and three,’ said Faithful.
‘Swallows in pairs round the old roof-tree,’ said Bao-chai.
‘A pair of threes upon the right,’ said Faithful.
‘Green duckweed-trails on the water bright.’
‘A three and six between them lie.’
‘Three peaks upon the rim of sky,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Together that gives “The lone
boat tied with an iron chain”,’ said Faithful.
‘The waves on every hand and the heart’s pain,’ said Bao-chai, and drank what
remained in her winecup.
‘Sky on the left, the good fresh air,’ said Faithful, putting down a double six.
‘Bright air and brilliant morn feed my despair,’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-chai, recognizing the quotation, turned and stared; but Dai-yu was too intent on
keeping her end up to have noticed.
‘A four and a six, the Painted Screen,’ said Faithful.
‘No Reddie at the window seen,’ said Dai-yu, desperately dredging up a line this
time from The Western Chamber to meet the emergency.
‘A two and a six, four twos make eight.’
‘In twos walk backwards from the Hall of State,’ said Dai?-yu, on safer ground with
a line from Du Fu.
‘Together makes: “A basket for the flowers you pick”,’ said Faithful.
‘A basket of peonies slung from his stick,’ Dai-yu con?cluded, and took a sip of her
wine.
‘Four and five, the Flowery Nine,’ said Faithful.
‘The flowering peach-tree drenched with rain,’ said Ying-chun.
‘Forfeit! Forfeit!’ said the others, laughing. ‘It doesn’t rhyme; and besides, the
words don’t fit.’
Ying-chun laughed and sipped her wine. As a matter of fact her failure was
intentional. Eager for more laughs, Xi-feng and Faithful had secretly intimated to the
four remaining cousins that they should give the wrong answers on purpose, in order
to come the more quickly to Grannie Liu. Accordingly Tan-chun, Xi-chun and Bao-yu,
all deliberately fell down on their first calls as well, leaving only Lady Wang to dispose
of, which Faithful accomplished by the simple expedient of sup?plying the answers
for her herself. It was now Grannie Liu’s turn.
‘We often play a game like this ourselves back home when we get together of an
evening,’ said Grannie Liu, ‘only the way we do it, it doesn’t sound so pretty as this.
Howsomever. I don’t mind having a try.’
‘It’s easy, really,’ said the others. ‘Don’t worry about what it sounds like. Just say
what comes naturally.’
Faithful began to lay.
‘A pair of fours on the left, the Man.’
Grannie Liu was a good long while puzzling over this. Finally she said.
‘Is it a farmer?’
The others roared with laughter.
‘That’s all right,’ said Grandmother Jia reassuringly. ‘That answer will do very well.’
‘You young people shouldn’t laugh at me,’ said Grannie Liu to the others. ‘I’m a
countrywoman born and I can’t help my country talk.’
‘Green three, red four, contrasting colours,’ called Faithful.
‘The fire burns up the caterpillars,’ said Grannie Liu.
‘Why, so it might,’ said the others. ‘Stick to your “country talk”, Grannie, you’re
doing fine!’
‘Red four on the right and the ace is red,’ said Faithful.
‘A turnip and a garlic-head.’
More laughter.
‘ “That Flower” those three together show,’ said Faithful.
‘This flower will to a pumpkin grow,’ said the flower-bedecked ancient, gesturing
with her hands to demonstrate the size of the imagined pumpkin.
The following chapter will show how the party progressed.
