CHAPTER 1



Zhen Shi-yin makes the Stone’s
acquaintance in a dream
And Jia Yu-cun finds that poverty is not incompatible
with romantic feelings

GENTLE READER,



What, you may ask, was the origin of this book?
Though the answer to this question may at first seem to border on the absurd,
reflection will show that there is a good deal more in it than meets the eye.
     Long ago, when the goddess Nǚ-wa was repairing the sky, she melted down a
great quantity of rock and, on the Incredible Crags of the Great Fable Mountains,
moulded the amalgam into thirty-six thousand, five hundred and one large building
blocks, each measuring seventy-two feet by a hundred and forty-four feet square.
She used thirty-six thousand five hundred of these blocks in the course of her
building operations, leaving a single odd block unused, which lay, all on its own, at
the foot of Greensickness Peak in the aforementioned mountains.
    Now this block of stone, having undergone the melting and molding of a goddess,
possessed magic powers. It could move about at will and could grow or shrink to any
size it wanted. Observing that all the other blocks had been used for celestial repairs
and that it was the only one to have been rejected as unworthy, it became filled with
shame and resentment and passed its days in sorrow and lamentation.
     One day, in the midst of its lamenting, it saw a monk and a Taoist approaching
from a great distance, each of them remarkable for certain eccentricities of manner
and appearance. When they arrived at the foot of Greensickness Peak, they sat down
on the ground and began to talk. The monk, catching sight of a lustrous, translucent
stone—it was in fact the rejected building block which had now shrunk itself to the
size of a fan-pendant and looked very attractive in its new shape—took it up on the
palm of his hand and addressed it with a smile:
‘Ha, I see you have magical properties! But nothing to recommend you. I shall have
to cut a few words on you so that anyone seeing you will know at once that you are
something special. After that I shall take you to a certain
brilliant
successful
poetical
cultivated
aristocratic
elegant
delectable
luxurious
opulent
locality on a little trip.’
The stone was delighted.
‘What words will you cut? Where is this place you will take me to? I beg to be
enlightened.’
‘Do not ask,’ replied the monk with a laugh. ‘You will know soon enough when the
time comes.’
And with that he slipped the stone into his sleeve and set off at a great pace with the
Taoist. But where they both went to I have no idea.

*

Countless aeons went by and a certain Taoist called Vanitas in quest of the secret of
immortality chanced to be passing below that same Greensickness Peak in the
Incredible Crags of the Great Fable Mountains when he caught sight of a large stone
standing there, on which the characters of a long in?scription were clearly
discernible.
Vanitas read the inscription through from beginning to end and learned that this was
a once lifeless stone block which had been found unworthy to repair the sky, but
which had magi?cally transformed its shape and been taken down by the Buddhist
mahāsattva Impervioso and the Taoist illuminate Mysterioso into the world of
mortals, where it had lived out the life of a man before finally attaining nirvana and
re?turning to the other shore. The inscription named the country where it had been
born, and went into considerable detail about its domestic life, youthful amours, and
even the verses, mottoes and riddles it had written. All it lacked was the
authentication of a dynasty and date. On the back of the stone was inscribed the
following quatrain:
Found unfit to repair the azure sky
Long years a foolish mortal man was I.
My life in both worlds on this stone is writ:
Pray who will copy out and publish it?

From his reading of the inscription Vanitas realized that this was a stone of some
consequence. Accordingly he addressed himself to it in the following manner:
‘Brother Stone, according to what you yourself seem to imply in these verses, this
story of yours contains matter of sufficient interest to merit publication and has been
carved here with that end in view. But as far as I can see (a) it has no discoverable
dynastic period, and (b) it contains no examples of moral grandeur among its
characters—no statesmanship, no social message of any kind. All I can find in it, in
fact, are a number of females, conspicuous, if at all, only for their passion or folly or
for some trifling talent or insignificant virtue. Even if I were to copy all this out, I
cannot see that it would make a very remarkable book.’
‘Come, your reverence,' said the stone (for Vanitas had been correct in assuming
that it could speak) ‘must you be so obtuse? All the romances ever written have an
artificial period setting—Han or Tang for the most part. In refusing to make use of
that stale old convention and telling my Story of the Stone exactly as it occurred, it
seems to me that, far from depriving it of anything, I have given it a freshness these
other books do not have.
‘ Your so-called “historical romances”, consisting, as they do, of scandalous
anecdotes about statesmen and emperors of bygone days and scabrous attacks on
the reputations of long-dead gentlewomen, contain more wickedness and immorality
than I care to mention. Still worse is the “erotic novel”, by whose filthy obscenities
our young folk are all too easily corrupted. And the “boudoir romances”, those dreary
stereotypes with their volume after volume all pitched on the same note and their
different characters undistinguishable except by name (all those ideally beautiful
young ladies and ideally eligible young bachelors)— even they seem unable to avoid
descending sooner or later into indecency.
“The trouble with this last kind of romance is that it only gets written in the first
place because the author requires a framework in which to show off his love-poems.
He goes about constructing this framework quite mechanically, beginning with the
names of his pair of young lovers and invariably adding a third character, a servant or
the like, to make mischief between them, like the chou in a comedy.
‘What makes these romances even more detestable is the stilted, bombastic
language— inanities dressed in pompous rhetoric, remote alike from nature and
common sense and teeming with the grossest absurdities.
    ‘Surely my “number of females”, whom I spent half a lifetime studying with my
own eyes and ears, are preferable to this kind of stuff? I do not claim that they are
better people than the ones who appear in books written before my time; I am only
saying that the contemplation of their actions and motives may prove a more
effective antidote to boredom and melancholy. And even the inelegant verses with
which my story is interlarded could serve to entertain and amuse on those convivial
occasions when rhymes and riddles are in demand.
     ‘All that my story narrates, the meetings and partings, the joys and sorrows, the
ups and downs of fortune, are recorded exactly as they happened. I have not dared
to add the tiniest bit of touching-up, for fear of losing the true picture.
     ‘My only wish is that men in the world below may some?times pick up this tale
when they are recovering from sleep or drunkenness, or when they wish to escape
from business worries or a fit of the dumps, and in doing so find not only mental
refreshment but even perhaps, if they will heed its lesson and abandon their vain and
frivolous pursuits, some small arrest in the deterioration of their vital forces. What
does your reverence say to that?’
     For a long time Vanitas stood lost in thought, pondering this speech. He then
subjected the Story of the stone to a careful second reading. He could see that its
main theme was love; that it consisted quite simply of a true record of real events;
and that it was entirely free from any tendency to deprave and corrupt. He therefore
copied it all out from beginning to end and took it back with him to look for a
publisher.
     As a consequence of all this, Vanitas, starting off in the Void (which is Truth)
came to the contemplation of Form (which is Illusion); and from Form engendered
Passion; and by communicating Passion, entered again into Form; and from Form
awoke to the Void (which is Truth). He therefore changed his name from Vanitas to
Brother Amor, or the Passionate Monk, (because he had approached Truth by way of
Passion), and changed the title of the book from The Story of the S tone to The Tale
of Brother Amor.
     Old Kong Mei-xi from the homeland of Confucius called the book A Mirror for
the Romantic. Wu Yu-feng called it A Dream of Golden Days. Cao Xueqin in his
Nostalgia Studio worked on it for ten years, in the course of which he rewrote it no
less than five times, dividing it into chapters, composing chapter headings, renaming
it The Twelve Beauties of Jinling, and adding an introductory quatrain. Red Inkstone
restored the original title when he recopied the book and added his second set of
annotations to it.
     This, then, is a true account of how The Story of the Stone came to be written.
     Pages full of idle words
     Penned with hot and bitter tears:
     All men call the author fool;
    None his secret message hears.

*

The origin of The Story of the Stone has now been made clear. The same cannot,
however, be said of the characters and events which it recorded. Gentle reader, have
patience! This is how the inscription began:
     Long, long ago the world was tilted downwards towards the south-east; and in
that lower-lying south-easterly part of the earth there is a city called Soochow; and in
Soochow the district around the Chang-men Gate is reckoned one of the two or
three wealthiest and most fashionable quarters in the world of men. Outside the
Chang-men Gate is a wide thorough-fare called Worldly Way; and somewhere off
Worldly Way is an area called Carnal Lane. There is an old temple in the Carnal Lane
area which, because of the way it is bottled up inside a narrow cul-de-sac, is referred
to locally as Bottle-gourd Temple. Next door to Bottle-gourd Temple lived a
gentleman of private means called Zhen Shi-yin and his wife Feng-shi, a kind, good
woman with a profound sense of decency and decorum. The household was not a
particularly wealthy one, but they were nevertheless looked up to by all and sundry
as the leading family in the neighbourhood.
     Zhen Shi-yin himself was by nature a quiet and totality unambitious person. He
devoted his time to his garden and to the pleasures of wine and poetry. Except for a
single flaw, his existence could, indeed, have been described as an idyllic one. The
flaw was that, although already past fifty, he had no son, only a little girl, just two
years old, whose name was Ying-lian.
     Once, during the tedium of a burning summer's day, Shi-yin was sitting idly in his
study. The book had slipped from his nerveless grasp and his head had nodded down
onto the desk in a doze. While in this drowsy state he seemed to drift off to some
place he could not identify, where he became aware of a monk and a Taoist walking
along and talking as they went.
     ‘Where do you intend to take that thing you are carrying?’ the Taoist was asking.
     ‘Don't you worry about him!’ replied the monk with a laugh. ‘There is a batch of
lovesick souls awaiting incarnation in the world below whose fate is due to be
decided this very day. I intend to take advantage of this opportunity to slip our little
friend in amongst them and let him have a taste of human life along with the rest.’
     ‘Well, well, so another lot of these amorous wretches is about to enter the vale
of tears,’ said the Taoist. ‘How did all this begin? And where are the souls to be
reborn?’
‘You will laugh when I tell you,’ said the monk. 'When this stone was left unused by
the goddess, he found himself at a loose end and took to wandering about all over
the place for want of better to do, until one day his wanderings took him to the place
where the fairy Disenchantment lives.
      ‘Now Disenchantment could tell that there was something unusual about this
stone, so she kept him there in her Sunset Glow Palace and gave him the honorary
title of Divine Luminescent Stone-in-Waiting in the Court of Sunset Glow.
      ‘But most of his time he spent west of Sunset Glow ex?ploring the banks of the
Magic River. There, by the Rock of Rebirth, he found the beautiful Crimson Pearl
Flower, for which he conceived such a fancy that he took to watering her every day
with sweet dew, thereby conferring on her the gift of life.
      ‘Crimson Pearl’s substance was composed of the purest cosmic essences, so she
was already half-divine; and now, thanks to the vitalizing effect of the sweet dew, she
was able to shed her vegetable shape and assume the form of a girl.
      ‘This fairy girl wandered about outside the Realm of Separation, eating the
Secret Passion Fruit when she was hungry and drinking from the Pool of Sadness
when she was thirsty. The consciousness that she owed the stone something for his
kindness in watering her began to prey on her mind and ended by becoming an
obsession.
      ‘ “I have no sweet dew here that I can repay him with,” she would say to herself.
“The only way in which I could perhaps repay him would be with the tears shed
during the whole of a mortal lifetime if he and I were ever to be reborn as humans in
the world below.”
      ‘Because of this strange affair, Disenchantment has got together a group of
amorous young souls, of which Crimson Pearl is one, and intends to send them down
into the world to take part in the great illusion of human life. And as to?day happens
to be the day on which this stone is fated to go into the world too, I am taking him
with me to Disenchant?ment’s tribunal for the purpose of getting him registered and
sent down to earth with the rest of these romantic creatures.’
     ‘How very amusing!’ said the Taoist. ‘I have certainly never heard of a debt of
tears before. Why shouldn’t the two of us take advantage of this opportunity to go
down into the world ourselves and save a few souls? It would be a work of merit.’
     ‘That is exactly what I was thinking,’ said the monk. ‘Come with me to
Disenchantment's palace to get this absurd creature cleared. Then, when this last
batch of romantic idiots goes down, you and I can go down with them. At present
about half have already been born. They await this last batch to make up the
number.’
     ‘Very good, I will go with you then,’ said the Taoist. Shi-yin heard all this
conversation quite clearly, and curiosity impelled him to go forward and greet the
two reverend gentlemen. They returned his greeting and asked him what he wanted.
     ‘It is not often that one has the opportunity of listening to a discussion of the
operations of karma such as the one I have just been privileged to overhear,’said
Shi-yin. ‘Unfortunately I am a man of very limited understanding and have not been
able to derive the full benefit from your conversation. If you would have the very
great kindness to enlighten my be?nighted understanding with a somewhat fuller
account of what you were discussing, I can promise you the most devout attention. I
feel sure that your teaching would have a salutary effect on me and—who
knows—might save me from the pains of hell.’
The reverend gentlemen laughed. ‘These are heavenly mysteries and may not be
divulged. But if you wish to escape from the fiery pit, you have only to remember us
when the time comes, and all will be well.’
     Shi-yin saw that it would be useless to press them. ‘Heavenly mysteries must not,
of course, be revealed. But might one perhaps inquire what the “absurd creature” is
that you were talking about? Is it possible that I might be allowed to see it?’
     ‘Oh, as for that,’said the monk: ‘I think it is on the cards for you to have a look at
him,’and he took the object from his sleeve and handed it to Shi-yin.
     Shi-yin took the object from him and saw that it was a clear, beautiful jade on
one side of which were carved the words ‘Magic Jade’. There were several columns of
smaller charac?ters on the back, which Shi-yin was lust going to examine more
closely when the monk, with a cry of ‘Here we are, at the frontier of Illusion’,
snatched the stone from him and disappeared, with the Taoist, through a big stone
archway above which

THE LAND OF ILLUSION

was written in large characters. A couplet in smaller characters was inscribed
vertically on either side of the arch:

Truth becomes fiction when the fiction’s true;
Real becomes not-teal where the unreal’s real.

    Shi-yin was on the point of following them through the archway when suddenly
a great clap of thunder seemed to shake the earth to its very foundations, making
him cry out in alarm.
    And there he was sitting in his study, the contents of his dream already half
forgotten, with the sun still blazing on the ever-rustling plantains outside, and the
wet-nurse at the door with his little daughter Ying-lian in her arms. Her delicate little
pink-and-white face seemed dearer to him than ever at that moment, and he
stretched out his arms to take her and hugged her to him.
     After playing with her for a while at his desk, he carried her out to the front of
the house to watch the bustle in the street. He was about to go in again when he saw
a monk and a Taoist approaching, the monk scabby-headed and barefoot, the Taoist
tousle-haired and limping. They were behaving like madmen, shouting with laughter
and gesticulating wildly as they walked along.
     When this strange pair reached Shi-yin’s door and saw him standing there
holding Ying-lian, the monk burst into loud sobs. ‘Patron,’ he said, addressing Shi-yin,
'what are you doing, holding in your arms that ill-fated creature who is destined to
involve both her parents in her own misfortune?'
Shi-yin realized that he was listening to the words of a madman and took no notice.
But the monk persisted:
‘Give her to me! Give her to me!’
Shi-yin was beginning to lose patience and clasping his little girl tightly to him, turned
on his heel and was about to re-enter the house when the monk pointed his finger at
him, roared with laughter, and then proceeded to intone the following verses:


‘Fond man, your pampered child to cherish so—
That caltrop-glass which shines on melting snow!
Beware the high feast of the fifteenth day,
When all in smoke and fire shall pass away!’

Shi-yin heard all this quite plainly and was a little worried by it. He was thinking or
asking the monk what lay behind these puzzling words when he heard the Taoist say,
‘We don’t need to stay tether. Why don’t we part company here and each go about
his own business? Three kalpas from now I shall wait far you on Bei-mang Hill. Having
joined forces again there, we can go together to the Land of Illusion to sign off.’
‘Excellent!’said the other. And the two if them went off and soon were both lost to
sight.
'There must have been something behind all this, ‘thought Shi-yin to himself.’1 really
ought to have asked him what he meant, but now it is too late.'
He was still standing outside his door brooding when Jia Yu-cun, the poor student
who lodged at the Bottle-gourd Temple next door, came up to him. Yu-cun was a
native of Hu-zhou and came from a family of scholars and bureaucrats which had,
however, fallen on bad times when Yu-cun was born. The family fortunes on both his
father’s and mother’s side had all been spent, and the members of the family had
themselves gradually died off until only Yu-cun was left There were no prospects for
him in his home town, so he had set off for the capital, in search of fame and fortune.
Unfor?tunately he had got no further than Soochow when his funds ran out, and he
had now been living there in poverty for a year, lodging in this temple and keeping
himself alive by working as a copyist. For this reason Shi-yin saw a great deal of his
company.
     As soon as he caught sight of Shi-yin, Yu-cun clasped his hands in greeting and
smiled ingratiatingly. ‘I could see you standing there gazing, sir. Has anything been
happening in the street?’
     ‘No, no,’ said Shi-yin. ‘It just happened that my little girl was crying, so I brought
her out here to amuse her. Your coming is most opportune, dear boy. I was beginning
to feel most dreadfully bored. Won’t you come into my little den, and we can help
each other to while away this tedious hot day?’
     So saying, he called for a servant to take the child indoors, while he himself took
Yu-cun by the hand and led him into his study, where his boy served them both with
tea. But they had not exchanged half-a-dozen words before one of the servants
rushed in to say that ‘Mr Yan had come to pay a call.’ Shi-yin hurriedly rose up and
excused himself: ‘I seem to have brought you here under false pretences. I do hope
you will forgive me. If you don’t mind sitting on your own here for a moment, I shall
be with you directly.’
     Yu-cun rose to his feet too. ‘Please do not distress yourself on my account, sir. I
am a regular visitor here and can easily wait a bit.’ But by the time he had finished
saying this, Shi-yin was already out of the study and on his way to the guest-room.
     Left to himself, Yu-cun was flicking through some of Shi?-yin’s books of poetry in
order to pass the time, when he heard a woman's cough outside the window.
Immediately he jumped up and peered out to see who it was. The cough appeared to
have come from a maid who was picking flowers in the garden. She was an unusually
good-looking girl with a rather refined face: not a great beauty, by any means, but
with something striking about her. Yu-cun gazed at her spellbound.
    Having now finished picking her flowers, this anonymous member of the Zhen
household was about to go in again when, on some sudden impulse, she raised her
head and caught sight of a man standing in the window. His hat was frayed and his
clothing threadbare; yet, though obviously poor, he had a fine, manly physique and
handsome, well-proportioned features.
    The maid hastened to remove herself from this male presence; but as she went
she thought to herself, ‘What a fine-looking man! But so shabby! The family hasn’t
got any friends or relations as poor as that. It must be that Jia Yu-cun the master is
always on about. No wonder he says that he won’t stay poor long. I remember
hearing him say that he’s often wanted to help him but hasn’t yet found an
opportunity.’ And thinking these thoughts she could not forbear to turn back for
another peep or two.
     Yu-cun saw her turn back and, at once assuming that she had taken a fancy to
him, was beside himself with delight. What a perceptive young woman she must be,
he thought, to have seen the genius underneath the rags! A real friend in trouble!
     After a while the boy came in again and Yu-cun elicited from him that the visitor
in the front room was now staying to dinner. It was obviously out of the question to
wait much longer, so he slipped down the passage-way at the side of the house and
let himself out by the back gate. Nor did Shi-yin invite him round again when, having
at last seen off his visitor, he learned that Yu-cun had already left.
     But then the Mid Autumn festival arrived and, after the family convivialities were
over, Shi-yin had a little dinner for two laid out in his study and went in person to
invite Yu-cun, walking to his temple lodgings in the moonlight.
     Ever since the day the Zhens’ maid had, by looking back twice over her shoulder,
convinced him that she was a friend, Yu-cun had had the girl very much on his mind,
and now that it was festival time, the full moon of Mid Autumn lent an inspiration to
his romantic impulses which finally resulted in the following octet:


‘Ere on ambition's path my feet are set,
Sorrow comes often this poor heart to fret.
Yet, as my brow contracted with new care,
Was there not one who, parting, turned to stare?
Dare I, that grasp at windows in the wind,
Hope, underneath the moon, a friend to find?
Bright orb, if with my plight you sympathize,
Shine first upon the chamber where she lies.’

Having delivered himself of this masterpiece, Yu-cun’s thoughts began to run on his
unrealized ambitions and, after much head-scratching and many heavenward glances
ac?companied by heavy sighs, he produced the following couplet, reciting it in a loud,
ringing voice which caught the ear of Shi-yin, who chanced at that moment to be
arriving:


‘The jewel in the casket bides till one shall come to buy.
The jade pin in the drawer hides, waiting its time to fly.’

Shi-yin smiled. ‘You are a man of no mean ambition, Yu-cun.’
‘Oh no!’Yu-cun smiled back deprecatingly. ‘You are too flattering. I was merely
reciting at random from the lines of some old poet. But what brings you here, sir?’
‘Tonight is Mid Autumn night,’said Shi-yin. ‘People call it the Festival of Reunion. It
occurred to me that you might be feeling rather lonely here in your monkery, so I
have arranged for the two of us to take a little wine together in my study. I hope you
will not refuse to join me.’
Yu-cun made no polite pretence of declining. ‘Your kind?ness is more than I deserve,’
he said. ‘I accept gratefully.’ And he accompanied Shi-yin back to the study next door.
Soon they had finished their tea. Wine and various choice dishes were brought in
and placed on the table, already laid out with cups, plates, and so forth, and the two
men took their places and began to drink. At first they were rather slow and
ceremonious; but gradually, as the conversation grew more animated, their potations
too became more reckless and un?inhibited. The sounds of music and singing which
could now be heard from every house in the neighbourhood and the full moon which
shone with cold brilliance overhead seemed to increase their elation, so that the
cups were emptied almost as soon as they touched their lips, and Yu-cun, who was
already a sheet or so in the wind, was seized with an irrepressible excitement to
which he presently gave expression in the form of a quatrain, ostensibly on the
subject of the moon, but really about the ambition he had hitherto been at some
pains to conceal:


‘In thrice five nights her perfect O is made,
Whose cold light bathes each marble balustrade.
As her bright wheel starts on its starry ways,
On earth ten thousand heads look up and gaze.’

     ‘Bravo!’said Shi-yin loudly. 'I have always insisted that you were a young fellow
who would go up in the world, and now, in these verses you have just recited, I see
an augury of your ascent. In no time at all we shall see you up among the clouds! This
calls for a drink!' And, saying this, he poured Yu-cun a large cup of wine.
     Yu-cun drained the cup, then, surprisingly, sighed:
     ‘Don't imagine the drink is making me boastful, but I really do believe that if it
were just a question of having the sort of qualifications now in demand, I should
stand as good a chance as any of getting myself on to the list of candidates. The
trouble is that I simply have no means of laying my hands on the money that would
be needed for lodgings and travel expenses. The journey to the capital is a long one,
and the sort of money I can earn from my copying is not enough—’
     ‘Why ever didn't you say this before?’ said Shi-yin inter?rupting him. ‘I have long
wanted to do something about this, but on all the occasions I have met you
previously, the con?versation has never got round to this subject, and I haven't liked
to broach it for fear of offending you. Well, now we know where we are. I am not a
very clever man, but at least I know the right thing to do when I see it. Luckily, the
next Triennial is only a few months ahead. You must go to the capital without delay. A
spring examination triumph will make you feel that all your studying has been worth
while. I shall take care of all your expenses. It is the least return I can make for your
friendship.’ And there and then he instructed his boy to go with all speed and make
up a parcel of fifty tales of the best refined silver and two suits of winter clothes.
     ‘The almanac gives the nineteenth as a good day for travel?ling,’ he went on,
addressing Yu-cun again. ‘You can set about hiring a boat for the journey straight
away. How de?lightful it will be to meet again next winter when you have
distinguished yourself by soaring to the top over all the other candidates!’
     Yu-cun accepted the silver and the clothes with only the most perfunctory word
of thanks and without, apparently, giving them a further moment’s thought, for he
continued to drink and laugh and talk as if nothing had happened. It was well after
midnight before they broke up.
After seeing Yu-cun off, Shi-yin went to bed and slept without a break until the sun
was high in the sky next morn?ing. When he awoke, his mind was still running on the
con?versation of the previous night. He thought he would write a couple of
introductory letters for Yu-cun to take with him to the capital, and arrange for him to
call on the family of an official he was acquainted with who might be able to put him
up; but when he sent a servant to invite him over, the servant brought back word
from the temple as follows:
'The monk says that Mr Jia set out for the capital at five o'clock this morning, sir. He
says he left a message to pass on to you. He said to tell you, “A scholar should not
concern himself with almanacs, but should act as the situation de?mands,”and he
said there wasn't time to say good-bye.'
So Shi-yin was obliged to let the matter drop.




*

It is a true saying that ‘time in idleness is quickly spent’. In no time at all it was
Fifteenth Night, and Shi-yin sent little Ying-lian out, in the charge of one of the
servants called Calamity, to see the mummers and the coloured lanterns. It was near
midnight when Calamity, feeling an urgent need to relieve his bladder, put Ying-lian
down on someone’s doorstep while he went about his business, only to find, on his
return, that the child was nowhere to be seen. Frantically he searched for her
throughout the rest of the night; but when day dawned and he had still not found her,
he took to his heels, not daring to face his master and mistress, and made off for
another part of the country.
Shi-yin and his wife knew that something must be wrong when their little girl failed
to return home all night. Then a search was made; but all those sent out were
obliged in the end to report that no trace of her could be found.
The shock of so sudden a loss to a middle-aged couple who had only ever had the
one daughter can be imagined. In tears every day and most of the night, they almost
lost the will to go on living, and after about a month like this first Shi-yin and then his
wife fell ill, so that doctors and diviners were in daily attendance on them.
     Then, on the fifteenth of the third month, while frying cakes for an offering, the
monk of Bottle-gourd Temple carelessly allowed the oil to catch alight, which set fire
to the paper window. And, since the houses in this area all had wooden walls and
bamboo fences—though also, doubtless, because they were doomed to destruction
anyway-the fire leaped from house to house until the whole street was blazing away
like a regular Fiery Mountain; and though the firemen came to put it out, by the time
they arrived the fire was well under way and long past controlling, and roared away
all night long until it had burnt itself out, rendering heaven knows how many families
homeless in the process.
Poor Zhens! Though they and their handful of domestics escaped unhurt, their house,
which was only next door to the temple, was soon reduced to a heap of rubble, while
Shi-yin stood by helpless, groaning and stamping in despair.
After some discussion with his wife, Shi-yin decided that they should move to their
farm in the country; but a series of crop failures due to flooding and drought had led
to wide?spread brigandage in those parts, and government troops were out
everywhere hunting down the mutinous peasants and making arrests. In such
conditions it was impossible to settle on the farm, so Shi-yin sold the land and, taking
only two of the maids with them, went with his wife to seek refuge with his
father-in-law, Feng Su.
     This Feng Su was a Ru-zhou man who, though only a farmer by calling, had a very
comfortable sufficiency. He was somewhat displeased to see his son-in-law arriving
like a refugee on his doorstep; but fortunately Shi- yin had on him the money he had
realized from the sale of the farm, and this he now entrusted to his father-in-law to
buy for him, as and when he could, a house and land on which he could depend for
his future livelihood. Feng Su embezzled about half of this sum and used the other
half to provide him with a ruinous cottage and some fields of poor, thin soil.
A scholar, with no experience of business or agricultural matters, Shi-yin now found
himself poorer after a year or two of struggle than when he had started. Feng Su
would treat him to a few pearls of rustic wisdom whenever they met, but behind his
back would grumble to all and sundry about 'incompetents' and 'people who liked
their food but were too lazy to work for it', which caused Shi-yin great bitterness
when it came to his ears. The anxieties and injustices which now beset him, coming
on top of the shocks he had suffered a year or two previously, left a man of his years
with little resistance to the joint onslaught of poverty and ill-health, and gradually he
began to betray the unmistakable symptoms of a decline.
One day, wishing to take his mind off his troubles for a bit, he had dragged himself,
stick in hand, to the main road, when it chanced that he suddenly caught sight of a
Taoist with a limp—a crazy, erratic figure in hempen sandals and tattered clothes,
who chanted the following words to himself as he advanced towards him:


‘Men all know that salvation should be won,
But with ambition won't have done, have done.
Where are the famous ones of days gone by?
In grassy graves they lie now, every one.

Men all know that salvation should be won,
But with their riches won't have done, have done.
Each day they grumble they've not made enough.
When they've enough, it's goodnight everyone!

Men all know that salvation should be won,
But with their loving wives they won't have done.
The darlings every day protest their love:
But once you're dead, they're off with another one.

                       Men all know that salvation should be won,
                       But with their children won't have done, have done.
                       Yet though of patents fond there is no lack,
Of grateful children saw I ne’er a one.’

Shi-yin approached the Taoist and questioned him. ‘What is all this you are saying?
All I can make out is a lot of “won” and “done”.’
‘If you can make out “won” and “done”,’ replied the Taoist with a smile, ‘you may
be said to have understood; for in all the affairs of this world what is won is done,
and what is done is won; for whoever has not yet done has not yet won, and in order
to have won, one must first have done. I shall call my song the “Won-Done Song”.’
Shi-yin had always been quick-witted, and on hearing these words a flash of
understanding had illuminated his mind. He therefore smiled back at the Taoist: ‘Wait
a minute! How would you like me to provide your “Won-Done Song” with a
commentary?’
        ‘Please do!’ said the Taoist; and Shi-yin proceeded as follows:
        ‘Mean hovels and abandoned halls
        Where courtiers once paid daily calls:
        Bleak haunts where weeds and willows scarcely thrive
        Were once with mirth and revelry alive.
        Whilst cobwebs shroud the mansion’s gilded beams,
        The cottage casement with choice muslin gleams.
        Would you of perfumed elegance recite?
        Even as you speak, the raven locks turn white.
        Who yesterday her lord’s bones laid in clay,
        On silken bridal-bed shall lie today.
        Coffers with gold and silver filled:
        Now, in a trice, a tramp by all reviled.
        One at some other’s short life gives a sigh,
        Not knowing that he, too, goes home—to die!
        The sheltered and well-educated lad,
        In spite of all your care, may turn out bad;

        And the delicate, fastidious maid
        End in a foul stews, plying a shameful trade.
        The judge whose hat is too small for his head
        Wears, in the end, a convict's cangue instead.
        Who shivering once in rags bemoaned his fate,
        Today finds fault with scarlet robes of state.
        In such commotion does the world’s theatre rage:
        As each one leaves, another takes the stage.
        In vain we roam:
        Each in the end must call a strange land home.
        Each of us with that poor girl may compare
        Who sews a wedding-gown for another bride to wear.'


‘A very accurate commentary!' cried the mad, lame Taoist, clapping his hands
delightedly.
But Shi-yin merely snatched the satchel that hung from the other’s shoulder and
slung it from his own, and with a shout of ‘Let's go!’ and without even waiting to call
back home, he strode off into the wide world in the company of the madman.
This event made a great uproar in the little town, and news of it was relayed from
gossip to gossip until it reached the ears of Mrs Zhen, who cried herself into fits when
she heard it. After consulting her father, she sent men out to inquire everywhere
after her husband; but no news of him was to be had.
It was now imperative that she should move in with her parents and look to them for
support. Fortunately she still had the two maids who had stayed on with her from
the Soochow days, and by sewing and embroidering morning, noon and night, she
and her women were able to make some contribution to her father's income. The
latter still found daily occasion to complain, but there was very little he could do
about it.
One day the elder of the two maids was purchasing some silks at the door when she
heard the criers clearing the street and all the people began to tell each other that
the new man?darin had arrived. She hid in the doorway and watched the guards and
runners marching past two by two. But when the mandarin in his black hat and
scarlet robe of office was borne past in his great chair, she stared for some time as
though puzzled. ‘Where have I seen that mandarin before?’she wondered. ‘His face
looks extraordinarily familiar.’ But presently she went into the house again and gave
the matter no further thought.
That night, just as they were getting ready for bed, there was suddenly a great
commotion at the door and a confused hubbub of voices shouting that someone was
wanted at the yamen for questioning, which so terrified Feng Su that he was
momentarily struck dumb and could only stare.
If you wish to know what further calamity this portended, you will have to read the
following chapter.
CHAPTER 2

A daughter of the Jias ends her days
in Yangchow city
And Leng Zi-xing discourses on the Jias of
Rong-guo House



Hearing the clamour of yamen runners outside, Feng Su hurried to the door, his face
wreathed in smiles, to ask what they wanted. ‘Tell Mr Zhen to step outside,’ they
were shouting. ‘Hurry!’
    Feng Su’s smile became even more ingratiating. ‘My name is Feng, not Zhen. My
son-in-law’s name is Zhen, but he left home to become a Taoist more than a year ago.
Could he be the one you want?’
‘“Feng” or “Zhen”, it’s all the same to us,’ said the runners; ‘but if you’re his
father-in-law you’d better come along with us to see the magistrate.’ And they
hustled him off, leaving the entire household in a state of panic, quite at a loss to
know what the trouble could be.
     It was ten o’clock before Feng Su returned, and everyone pressed him to give a
full account of what had transpired.
     ‘It seems that the new mandarin is a Hu-zhou man called Jia. He used to be an
acquaintance of Shi-yin’s in the old days. He guessed that Shi-yin must have moved to
these parts when he saw our Lucky in the doorway buying silks. That’s why he sent
the runners here. I explained what had happened to Shi-yin, and he seemed very
upset. Then he asked me about Ying-lian, and I said she was lost while out watching
the lanterns. “Never mind,” he said, “wait till I send some people out to look for her.
We shall have her back in no time.” Then we chatted a bit longer, and lust as I was
going, he gave me two taels of silver.’
     Mrs Zhen could not help being affected by this account. But the rest of that night
we pass over in silence.
     Early next day a messenger arrived from Yu-cun bearing two packets of silver and
four bolts of silk brocade for Mrs Zhen as a token of the sender’s gratitude. There was
also a confidential letter for Feng Su commissioning him to ask Mrs Zhen for Lucky’s
hand as Yu-cun’s second wife. En?raptured at the prospect of doing a good turn for a
mandarin, Feng Su hastened to urge upon his daughter the importance of complying
with this request, and that very night Lucky was bundled into a small covered chair
and carried off to the yamen. Yu-cun’s delight goes without saying. Another hundred
taels of silver were despatched to Feng Su, together with a number of good things for
Mrs Zhen, to cheer and sustain her until such time as her daughter’s whereabouts
could be discovered.
Lucky was, of course, the maid who had once turned back to look at Yu-cun when
they were living at the house in Soochow. She could scarcely have foreseen at the
time what singular good fortune that one glance would procure for her. But she was
destined to be doubly fortunate. She had not been with Yu-cun more than a year
when she gave birth to a son; and a mere six months later Yu-cun’s first wife died,
whereupon Lucky was promoted to fill her place and became Her Lady ship. As the
proverb says,

         Sometimes by chance
         A look or a glance
             May one’s fortune advance.

*

When Yu-cun received the gift of money from Zhen Shi-yin he had left for the capital
on the day after the festival. He had done well in the Triennial examination, passing
out as a Palace Graduate, and had been selected for external service. And now he
had been promoted to the magistracy of this district.
But although his intelligence and ability were outstanding, these qualities were
unfortunately offset by a certain cupidity and harshness and a tendency to use his
intelligence in order to outwit his superiors; all of which caused his fellow-officials to
cast envious glances in his direction, with the result that in less than a year an
unfavourable report was sent in by a senior official stating that his ‘seeming ability
was no more than a mask for cunning and duplicity’ and citing one or two instances
in which he had aided and abetted the peculations of his underlings or allied himself
with powerful local interests in order to frustrate the course of justice.
The imperial eye, lighting on this report, kindled with wrath. Yu-cun’s instant
dismissal was commanded. The officials at the Prefecture, when notice that he was
to be cashiered arrived from the Ministry, rejoiced to a man. But Yu-cun, in spite of
all the shame and chagrin that he felt, allowed no glimmer of resentment to appear
on his face. Indeed, he joked and smiled as before, and when the business of handing
over was completed, he took his wife and family and the loot he had accumulated
during his years of office and having settled them all safely in his native Hu-zhou, set
off, free as the air, on an extended tour of some of the more celebrated places of
scenic interest in our mighty empire.
One day Yu-cun chanced to be staying in the Yangchow area when he heard that the
Salt Commissioner for that year was a certain Lin Ru-hai. This Lin Ru-hai had passed
out Florilege, or third in the whole list of successful candidates, in a previous
Triennial, and had lately been promoted to the Censorate. He was a Soochow man
and had not long taken up his duties in Yangchow following his nomination by the
emperor as Visiting Inspector in that area.
Lin Ru-hai came of an aristocratic family and was himself fifth in line since his
ancestor’s ennoblement. The original patent had been inheritable only up to the
third generation, and it was only through the magnanimity of the reigning sovereign
that an exceptional act of grace had extended it for a further generation in the case
of Lin Ru-hai’s father. Lin Ru-hai himself had therefore been obliged to make his way
up through the examination system. It was fortunate for him that, though the family
had up to his time enjoyed hereditary emoluments, it had nevertheless enjoined a
high standard of education on all of its members.
Lin Ru-hai was less fortunate, however, in belonging to a family whose numbers were
dwindling. He could still point to several related households, but they were all on the
distaff side. There was not a single relation in the direct line who bore his name.
Already he was fifty, and his only son had died the year before at the age of three.
And although he kept several concubines, he seemed fated to have no son, and had
all but resigned himself to this melancholy fact.
His chief wife, who had been a Miss Jia, had given him a daughter called Dai-yu. Both
parents doted on her, and because she showed exceptional intelligence, conceived
the idea of giving her a rudimentary education as a substitute for bringing up a son,
hoping in this way somewhat to alleviate the sense of desolation left by the death of
their only heir.
Now Jia Yu-cun had had the misfortune to catch a severe chill while staying in his
lodgings at Yangchow, and after his recovery, found himself somewhat short of cash.
He was therefore already looking around for some more permanent haven where he
could rest and recuperate, when he chanced to run into two old friends who were
acquainted with the new Salt Commissioner and who, knowing that the latter was
looking for a suitable tutor for his daughter, took Yu-cun along to the yamen and
introduced him, with the result that he was given the job.
Since Yu-cun’s pupil was both very young and rather delicate, there were no regular
hours of instruction; and as she had only a couple of little maids studying with her for
company who stayed away when she did, Yu-cun’s employ?ment was far from
arduous and left ample time for convales?cence.
A year or more passed uneventfully and then, quite un?expectedly, Lin Ru-hai’s wife
took ill and died. Yu-cun’s little pupil helped with the nursing throughout her
mother’s last illness and mourned for her bitterly after her death. The extra strain
this placed on her always delicate constitution brought on a severe attack of a
recurrent sickness, and for a long time she was unable to pursue her lessons.
Bored by his enforced idleness, Yu-cun took to going for walks as soon as lunch was
over whenever the weather was warm and sunny.
One day a desire to savour country sights and sounds led him outside the city walls,
and as he walked along with no fixed destination in mind, he presently found himself
in a place ringed with hills and full of murmuring brooks and tall stands of bamboo
where a temple stood half-hidden among the trees. The walled approach to the
gateway had fallen in and parts of the surrounding wall were in ruins. A board above
the gate announced the temple’s name:

THE TEMPLE OF PERFECT KNOWLEDGE

while two cracked and worn uprights at the sides of the gate were inscribed with the
following couplet:
(on the right-hand side)

As long as there is a sufficiency behind you, you press greedily forward.

(on the left-hand side)

It is only when there is no road in front of you that you think of turning back.


‘The wording is commonplace to a degree,’ Yu-cun reflected, ‘yet the sentiment is
quite profound. In all the famous temples and monasteries I have visited, I cannot
recollect having ever seen anything quite like it. I shouldn’t be surprised to find that
some story of spectacular downfall and dramatic conversion lay behind this
inscription. It might be worth going in and inquiring.’
But when he went inside and looked around, he saw only an ancient, wizened monk
cooking some gruel who paid no attention whatsoever to his greetings and who
proved, when Yu-cun went up to him and asked him a few questions, to be both deaf
and partially blind. His toothless replies were all but unintelligible, and in any case
bore no relation to the questions.
Yu-cun walked out again in disgust. He now thought that in order to give the full rural
flavour to his outing he would treat himself to a few cups of wine in a little country
inn and accordingly directed his steps towards the near-by village. He had scarcely
set foot inside the door of the village inn when one of the men drinking at separate
tables inside rose up and advanced to meet him with a broad smile.
‘Fancy meeting you!’
It was an antique dealer called Leng Zi-xing whom Yu-cun had got to know some
years previously when he was staying in the capital. Yu-cun had a great admiration
for Zi-xing as a practical man of business, whilst Zi-xing for his part was tickled to
claim acquaintanceship with a man of Yu-cun’s great learning and culture. On the
basis of this mutual admiration the two of them had got on wonderfully well, and
Yu-cun now returned the other’s greeting with a pleased smile.
‘My dear fellow! How long have you been here? I really had no idea you were in
these parts. It was quite an accident that I came here today at all. What an
extraordinary coincidence!’
‘I went home at the end of last year to spend New Year with the family,’ said Zi-xing.
‘On my way back to the capital I thought I would stop off and have a few words with
a friend of mine who lives hereabouts, and he very kindly invited me to spend a few
days with him. I hadn’t got any urgent business waiting for me, so I thought I might as
well stay on a bit and leave at the middle of the month. I came out here on my own
because my friend has an engagement today. I certainly didn’t expect to run into you
here.’
Zi-xing conducted Yu-cun to his table as he spoke and ordered more wine and some
fresh dishes to be brought. The two men then proceeded, between leisurely sips of
wine, to relate what each had been doing in the years that had elapsed since their
last meeting.
Presently Yu-cun asked Zi-xing if anything of interest had happened recently in the
capital.
‘I can’t think of anything particularly deserving of mention,’ said Zi-xing. ‘Except,
perhaps, for a very small but very unusual event that took place in your own clan
there.’
‘What makes you say that?’ said Yu-cun, ‘I have no family connections in the
capital.’
‘Well, it’s the same name,’ said Zi-xing. ‘They must be the same clan.’
Yu-cun asked him what family he could be referring to.
‘I fancy you wouldn’t disown the Jias of the Rong-guo mansion as unworthy of you.’
‘Oh, you mean them,’ said Yu-cun. ‘There are so many members of my clan, it’s
hard to keep up with them all. Since the time of Jia Fu of the Eastern Han dynasty
there have been branches of the Jia clan in every province of the empire. The
Rong-guo branch is, as a matter of fact, on the same clan register as my own; but
since they are exalted so far above us socially, we don’t normally claim the
connection, and nowa?days we are completely out of touch with them.’
Zi-xing sighed. ‘You shouldn’t speak about them in that way, you know. Nowadays
both the Rong and Ning mansions are in a greatly reduced state compared with what
they used to be.’
‘When I was last that way the Rong and Ning mansions both seemed to be fairly
humming with life. Surely nothing could have happened to reduce their prosperity in
so short a time?’
‘Ah, you may well ask. But it’s a long story.’
‘Last time I was in Jinling,’ went on Yu-cun, ‘I passed by their two houses one day on
my way to Shi-tou-cheng to visit the ruins. The Ning-guo mansion along the eastern
half of the road and the Rong-guo mansion along the western half must between
them have occupied the greater part of the north side frontage of that street. It’s
true that there wasn’t much activity outside the main entrances, but looking up over
the outer walls I had a glimpse of the most magnificent and imposing halls and
pavilions, and even the rocks and trees of the gardens beyond seemed to have a
sleekness and luxuriance that were certainly not suggestive of a family whose
fortunes were in a state of decline.’
‘Well! For a Palace Graduate Second Class, you ought to know better than that!
Haven’t you ever heard the old saying, “The beast with a hundred legs is a long time
dying”? Although I say they are not as prosperous as they used to be in years past, of
course I don’t mean to say that there is not still a world of difference between their
circumstances and those you would expect to find in the household of your average
government official. At the moment the numbers of their establishment and the
activities they engage in are, if anything, on the increase. Both masters and servants
all lead lives of luxury and magnificence. And they still have plenty of plans and
projects under way. But they can’t bring themselves to economize or make any
adjustment in their ac?customed style of living. Consequently, though outwardly they
still manage to keep up appearances, inwardly they are beginning to feel the pinch.
But that’s a small matter. There’s something much more seriously wrong with them
than that. They are not able to turn out good sons, those stately houses, for all their
pomp and show. The males in the family get more degenerate from one generation
to the next.’
‘Surely,’ said Yu-cun with surprise, ‘it is inconceivable that such highly cultured
households should not give their children the best education possible? I say nothing
of other families, but the Jias of the Ning and Rong households used to be famous for
the way in which they brought up their sons. How could they come to be as you
describe?’
‘I assure you, it is precisely those families I am speaking of. Let me tell you
something of their history. The Duke of Ning-guo and the Duke of Rong-guo were two
brothers by the same mother. Ning-guo was the elder of the two. When he died, his
eldest son, Jia Dai-hua, inherited his post. Dai?hua had two sons. The elder, Jia Fu,
died at the age of eight or nine, leaving only the second son, Jia Jing, to inherit.
Nowadays Jia Jing’s only interest in life is Taoism. He spends all his time over retorts
and crucibles concocting elixirs, and refuses to be bothered with anything else.
‘Fortunately he had already provided himself with a son, Jia Zhen, long before he
took up this hobby. So, having set his mind on turning himself into an immortal, he
has given up his post in favour of this son. And what’s more he refuses outright to
live at home and spends his time fooling around with a pack of Taoists somewhere
outside the city walls.
‘This Jia Zhen has got a son of his own, a lad called Jia Rong, just turned sixteen.
With old Jia Jing out of the way and refusing to exercise any authority, Jia Zhen has
thrown his res[omsiblities to thw winds and given himself up to a life of pleasure. He
has turned that Ning-guo mansion upside down, but there is no one around who
dares gainsay him.
‘Now I come to the Rong household—it was there that this strange event occurred
that I was telling you about. When the old Duke of Rong-guo died, his eldest son, Jia
Dai-shan, inherited his emoluments. He married a girl from a very old Nanking family,
the daughter of Marquis Shi, who bore him two sons, Jia She and Jia Zheng.
‘Dai-shan has been dead this many a year, but the old lady is still alive. The elder
son, Jia She, inherited; but he’s only a very middling sort of person and doesn’t play
much part in running the family. The second son, though, Jia Zheng, has been mad
keen on study ever since he was a lad. He is a very upright sort of person, straight as
a die. He was his grand?father’s favourite. He would have sat for the examinations,
but when the emperor saw Dai-shan’s testamentary memorial that he wrote on his
death bed, he was so moved, thinking what a faithful servant the old man had been,
that he not only ordered the elder son to inherit his father’s position, but also gave
instructions that any other sons of his were to be pre?sented to him at once, and on
seeing Jia Zheng he gave him the post of Supernumerary Executive Officer, brevet
rank, with instructions to continue his studies while on the Minis?try’s payroll. From
there he Jias now risen to the post of Under Secretary.
‘Sir Zheng’s lady was formerly a Miss Wang. Her first child was a boy called Jia Zhu.
He was already a Licensed Scholar at the age of fourteen. Then he married and had a
son. But he died of an illness before he was twenty. The second child she bore him
was a little girl, rather remarkable because she was born on New Year’s day. Then
after an interval of twelve years or more she suddenly had another son. He was even
more remarkable, because at the moment of his birth he had a piece of beautiful,
clear, coloured jade in his mouth with a lot of writing on it. They gave him the name
“Bao-yu” as a consequence. Now tell me if you don’t think that is an extraordinary
thing.’
‘It certainly is,’ Yu-cun agreed. ‘I should not be at all surprised to find that there was
something very unusual in the heredity of that child.’
‘Humph,’ said Zi-xing. ‘A great many people have said that. That is the reason why
his old grandmother thinks him such a treasure. But when they celebrated the First
Twelve month and Sir Zheng tested his disposition by putting a lot of objects in front
of him and seeing which he would take hold of, he stretched out his little hand and
started playing with some women’s things –combs, bracelets, pots of rouge and
powder and the like—completely ignoring all the other ob?jects. Sir Zheng was very
displeased. He said he would grow up to be a rake, and ever since then he hasn’t felt
much affection for the child. But to the old lady he’s the very apple of her eye.
‘But there’s more that’s unusual about him than that. He’s now rising ten and
unusually mischievous, yet his mind is as sharp as a needle. You wouldn’t find one in
a hundred to match him. Some of the childish things he says are most extraordinary.
He’ll say, “Girls are made of water and boys are made of mud. When I am with girls I
feel fresh and clean’ but when I am with boys I feel stupid and nasty.” Now isn’t that
priceless! He’ll be a lady-killer when he grows up, no question of that.’
Yu-cun’s face assumed an expression of unwonted severity. ‘Not so. By no means. It is
a pity that none of you seem to understand this child’s heredity. Most likely even my
esteemed kinsman Sir Jia Zheng is mistaken in treating the boy as a future libertine.
This is something that no one but a widely read person, and one moreover
well-versed in moral philosophy and in the subtle arcana of metaphysical science
could possibly understand.’
Observing the weighty tone in which these words were uttered, Zi-xing hurriedly
asked to be instructed, and Yu-cun proceeded as follows:
‘The generative processes operating in the universe provide the great majority of
mankind with natures in which good and evil are commingled in more or less equal
proportions. In?stances of exceptional goodness and exceptional badness are
produced by the operation of beneficent or noxious ethereal influences, of which the
former are symptomatized by the equilibrium of society and the latter by its
disequilib?rium.
   ‘Thus,
Yao,
Shun,
Yu,
Tang,
King Wen,
King Wu,
the Duke of Zhou,
the Duke of Shao,
Confucius,
Mencius,
Dong Zhong-shu,
Han Yu,
Zhou Dun-yi,
the Cheng brothers,
Zhu Xi and
Zhang Zai
— all instances of exceptional goodness—were born under the influence of benign
forces, and all sought to promote the well-being of the societies in which they lived;
whilst
Chi You,
Gong Gong,
Jie,
Zhou,
the First Qin Emperor,
Wang Mang,
Cao Cao,
Huan Wen,
An Lu-shan and
Qin Kuai
—all instances of exceptional badness—were born under the influence of harmful
forces, and all sought to disrupt the societies in which they lived.
‘Now, the good cosmic fluid with which the natures of the exceptionally good are
compounded is a pure, quintessential humour; whilst the evil fluid which infuses the
natures of the exceptionally bad is a cruel, perverse humour.
‘Therefore, our age being one in which beneficent ethereal influences are in the
ascendant, in which the reigning dynasty’ is well-established and society both
peaceful and prosperous, innumerable instances are to be found, from the palace
down to the humblest cottage, of individuals endowed with the pure, quintessential
humour.
‘Moreover, an unused surplus of this pure, quintessential humour, unable to find
corporeal lodgment, circulates freely abroad until it manifests itself in the form of
sweet dews and balmy winds, asperged and effused for the enrichment and
refreshment of all terrestial life.
‘Consequently, the cruel and perverse humours, unable to circulate freely in the air
and sunlight, subside, by a process of incrassation and coagulation, into the bottoms
of ditches and ravines.
Now, should these incrassate humours chance to be stirred or provoked by wind or
weather into a somewhat more volatile and active condition, it sometimes happens
that a stray wisp or errant flocculus may escape from the fissure or concavity in
which they are contained; and if some of the pure, quintessential humour should
chance to be passing overhead at that same moment, the two will become locked in
irreconcilable conflict, the good refusing to yield to the evil, the evil persisting in its
hatred of the good. And just as wind, water, thunder and lightning meeting together
over the earth can neither dissipate nor yield one to another but produce an
explosive shock resulting in the downward emission of rain, so does this clash of
humours result in the forcible downward expulsion of the evil humour, which, being
thus forced down-wards, will find its way into some human creature.
‘Such human recipients, whether they be male or female, since they are already
amply endowed with the benign humour before the evil humour is injected, are
incapable of becoming either greatly good or greatly bad; but place them in the
company of ten thousand others and you will find that they are superior to all the
rest in sharpness and intelligence and inferior to all the rest in perversity,
wrongheadedness and eccentricity. Born into a rich or noble household they are
likely to become great lovers or the occasion of great love in others; in a poor but
well-educated household they will become literary rebels or eccentric aesthetes;
even if they are born in the lowest stratum of society they are likely to become great
actors or famous hetaerae. Under no circumstances will you find them in servile or
menial positions, content to be at the beck and call of mediocrities.
‘For examples I might cite:

Xu You,
Tao Yuan-ming,
Ruan Ji,
Ji Kang,
Liu Ling,
the Wang and Xie clans of the Jin period,
Gu Kai-zhi,
the last ruler of Chen,
the emperor Ming-huang of the Tang dynasty,
the emperor Hui-zong of the Song dynasty,
Liu Ting-zhi,
Wen Ting-yun,
Mi Fei,
Shi Yan-nian,
Liu Yong and
Qin Guan;
or, from more recent centuries:

Ni Zan,
Tang Yin and
Zhu Yun-ming;
or again, for examples of the last type:
Li Gui-nian,
Huang Fan-chuo,
Jing Xin-mo,
Zhuo Wen-jun,
Little Red Duster,
Xue Tao,
Cui Ying-ying and
Morning Cloud.
All of these, though their circumstances differed, were essentially the same.’
‘You mean’ Zi-xing interposed,
‘Zhang victorious is a hero,
Zhang beaten is a lousy knave?’


‘Precisely so,’ said Yu-cun. ‘I should have told you that during the two years after I
was cashiered I travelled exten?sively in every province of the empire and saw quite
a few remarkable children in the course of my travels; so that just now when you
mentioned this Bao-yu I felt pretty certain what type of boy he must be. But one
doesn’t need to go very far afield for another example. There is one in the Zhen
family in Nanking—I am referring to the family of the Zhen who is Imperial Deputy
Director-General of the Nanking Secretariat. Perhaps you know who I mean?’
‘Who doesn’t?’ said Zi-xing. ‘There is an old family con?nection between the Zhen
family and the Jias of whom we have just been speaking, and they are still on very
close terms with each other. I’ve done business with them myself for longer than I’d
care to mention.’
‘Last year when I was in Nanking,’ said Yu-cun, smiling at the recollection, ‘I was
recommended for the post of tutor in their household. I could tell at a glance, as
soon as I got inside the place, that for all the ducal splendour this was a family
“though rich yet given to courtesy”, in the words of the Sage, and that it was a rare
piece of luck to have got a place in it. But when I came to teach my pupil, though he
was only at the first year primary stage, he gave me more trouble than an
examination candidate.
‘He was indeed a comedy. He once said, “I must have two girls to do my lessons
with me if I am to remember the words and understand the sense. Otherwise my
mind will simply not work.” And he would often tell the little pages who waited on
him, “The word ‘girl’ is very precious and very pure. It is much more rare and
precious than all the rarest beasts and birds and plants in the world. So it is most
extremely important that you should never, never violate it with your coarse mouths
and stinking breath. Whenever you need to say it, you should first rinse your mouths
out with clean water and scented tea. And if ever I catch you slipping up, I shall have
holes drilled through your teeth and lace them up together.”
‘There was simply no end to his violence and unruliness. Yet as soon as his lessons
were over and he went inside to visit the girls of the family, he became a completely
different person—all gentleness and calm, and as intelligent and well-bred as you
please.
‘His father gave him several severe beatings but it made no difference. Whenever
the pain became too much for him he would start yelling “Girls! girls!” Afterwards,
when the girls in the family got to hear about it, they made fun of him. “Why do you
always call to us when you are hurt? I suppose you think we shall come and plead for
you to be let off. You ought to be ashamed of yourself!” But you should have heard
his answer. He said, “Once when the pain was very bad, I thought that perhaps if I
shouted the word ‘girls’ it might help to ease it. Well,” he said, “I just called out once,
and the pain really was quite a bit better. So now that I have found this secret remedy,
I just keep on shouting ‘Girls! girls! girls!’ whenever the pain is at its worst.” I could
not help laughing.
‘But because his grandmother doted on him so much, she was always taking the
child’s part against me and his father. In the end I had to hand in my notice. A boy like
that will never be able to keep up the family traditions or listen to the advice of his
teachers and friends. The pity of it is, though, that the girls in that family are all
exceptionally good.’
‘The three at present in the Jia household are also very fine girls,’ said Zi-xing. ‘Sir
Jia Zheng’s eldest girl, Yuan?chun, was chosen for her exceptional virtue and
cleverness to be a Lady Secretary in the Imperial Palace. The next in age after her and
eldest of the three still at home is called Ying?chun. She is the daughter of Sir Jia She
by one of his secondary wives. After her comes another daughter of Sir Zheng’s, also
a concubine’s child, called Tan-chun. The youngest, Xi-chun, is sister-german to Mr Jia
Zhen of the Ning-guo mansion. Old Lady Jia is very fond of her granddaughters and
keeps them all in her own apartments on the Rong-guo side. They all study together,
and I have been told that they are doing very well.’
‘One of the things I liked about the Zhen family,’ said Yu-cun, ‘was their custom of
giving the girls the same sort of names as the boys, unlike the majority of families
who invariably use fancy words like “chun”, “hong”, “xiang”, “yu”, and so forth. How
comes it that the Jias should have followed the vulgar practice in this respect?’
‘They didn’t,’ said Zi-xing. ‘The eldest girl was called “Yuan-chun” because she was
in fact born on the first day of spring. The others were given names with “chun” in
them to match hers. But if you go back a generation, you will find that among the Jias
too the girls had names exactly like the boys’.
‘I can give you proof. Your present employer’s good lady is sister-german to Sir She
and Sir Zheng of the Rong house?hold. Her name, before she married, was Jia Min. If
you don’t believe me, you make a few inquiries when you get home and you’ll find it
is so.’
Yu-cun clapped his hands with a laugh. ‘Of course! I have often wondered why it is
that my pupil Dai-yu always pronounces “min” as “mi” when she is reading and, if
she has to write it, always makes the character with one or two strokes missing. Now
I understand. No wonder her speech and behaviour are so unlike those of ordinary
children! I always supposed that there must have been something remarkable about
the mother for her to have produced so remarkable a daughter. Now I know that she
was related to the Jias of the Rong household, I am not surprised.
‘By the way, I am sorry to say that last month the mother passed away.’
Zi-xing sighed. ‘Fancy her dying so soon! She was the youngest of the three. And the
generation before them are all gone, every one. We shall have to see what sort of
husbands they manage to find for the younger generation!’
‘Yes, indeed,’ said Yu-cun. ‘Just now you mentioned that Sir Zheng had this boy with
the jade in his mouth and you also mentioned a little grandson left behind by his
elder son. What about old Sir She? Surely he must have a son?’
‘Since Sir Zheng had the boy with the jade, he has had another son by a concubine,’
said Zi-xing, ‘but I couldn’t tell you what he’s like. So at present he has two sons and
one grandson. Of course, we don’t know what the future may bring.
‘But you were asking about Sir She. Yes, he has a son too, called Jia Lian. He’s
already a young man in his early twenties. He married his own kin, the niece of his
Uncle Zheng’s wife, Lady Wang. He’s been married now ￡or four or five years.
Holds the rank of a Sub-perfect by purchase. He’s another member of the family who
doesn’t find responsibilities congenial. He knows his way around, though, and has a
great gift of the gab, so at present he stays at home with his Uncle Zheng and helps
him manage the family’s affairs. However, ever since he married this young lady I
mentioned, every?one high and low has joined in praising her, and he has been put
into the shade rather. She is not only a very handsome young woman, she also has a
very ready tongue and a very good head – more than a match for most men, I can tell
you.’
‘You see, I was not mistaken,’ said Yu-cun. ‘All these people you and I have been
talking about are probably examples of that mixture of good and evil humours I was
describing to you.’
‘Well, I don’t know about that,’ said Zi-xing. ‘Instead of sitting here setting other
people’s accounts to rights, let’s have another drink!’
‘I am afraid I have drunk quite a lot while we were busy talking,’ said Yu-cun.
Zi-xing laughed. ‘There’s nothing like a good gossip about other people’s affairs for
making the wine go down! I’m sure an extra cup or two won’t do us any harm.’
Yu-cun glanced out of the window. ‘It’s getting late. We must be careful we don’t get
shut out of the city. Why not continue the conversation on our way back? Then we
can take our time.’
The two men accordingly rose from their seats, settled the bill for the wine, and were
just about to start on their way, when a voice from behind called out, ‘Yu-cun,
congratulations! I’ve got some good news for you.’
Yu-cun turned to look.
But if you wish to know who it was, you will have to read the next chapter.
CHAPTER 3

Lin Ru-hai recommends a private tutor
to his brother-in-law
And old Lady Jia extends a compassionate welcome
to the motherless child



When Yu-cun turned to look, he was surprised to see that it was Zhang Ru-gui, a
former colleague who had been cashiered at the same time and for the same reason
as himself. Zhang Ru-gui was a native of these parts, and had been living at home
since his dismissal. Having just wormed out the information that a motion put
forward in the capital for the reinstatement of ex-officials had been approved, he had
been dashing about ever since, pulling strings and soliciting help from potential
backers, and was engaged in this activity when he unexpectedly ran into Yu-cun.
Hence the tone of his greeting.
     As soon as they had finished bowing to each other, Zhang Ru-gui told Yu-cun the
good news, and after further hurried conversation they went their separate ways.
     Leng Zi-xing, who had overheard the news, proposed a plan. Why should not
Yu-cun ask his employer Lin Ru-hai to write to his brother-in-law Jia Zheng in the
capital and enlist his support on his, Yu-cun’s, behalf? Yu-cun agreed to follow this
suggestion, and presently the two friends separated.
     Back in his quarters, Yu-cun quickly hunted out a copy of the Gazette, and having
satisfied himself that the news was authentic, broached the matter next day with Lin
Ru-hai.
     ‘It so happens that an opportunity of helping you has just presented itself,’ said
Ru-hai. ‘Since my poor wife passed on, my mother-in-law in the capital has been
worried about the little girl having no one to look after her, and has already sent
some of her folk here by barge to fetch her away. The only reason she has so far not
gone is that she has not been quite recovered from her illness. I was, however, only
just now thinking that the moment to send her had arrived. And as I have still done
nothing to repay you for your kindness in tutoring her for me, you may be sure that
now this opportunity has presented itself I shall do my very best to help you.
     ‘As a matter of fact, I have already made a few arrangements. I have written this
letter here entrusting my brother-in-law with your affair, explaining my indebtedness
to you and urging him to see it properly settled. I have also made it quite clear in my
letter that any expenses which may be involved are to be taken care of; so you have
nothing to worry about on that account.’
     Yu-cun made an elaborate bow to his patron and thanked him profusely. He then
ventured a question.
     ‘I am afraid I do not know what your relation’s position is at the capital. Might it
not be a little embarrassing for a person in my situation to thrust himself upon him?’
     Ru-hai laughed. ‘You need have no anxiety on that score. My brothers-in-law in
the capital are your own kinsmen. They are grandsons of the former Duke of
Rong-guo. The elder one, Jia She, is an hereditary official of the First Rank and an
honorary colonel; the younger one, Jia Zheng, is an Under Secretary in the Ministry
of Works. He takes very much after his late grandfather: a modest, generous man,
quite without the arrogance of the pampered aristocrat. That is why I have addressed
this letter to him. If I did not have complete con?fidence in his willingness to help you,
I should not have put your honour at risk by soliciting him; nor, for that matter,
should I have taken the trouble to write the letter.’
Yu-cun now knew that what Zi-xing had told him was the truth and he thanked Lin
Ru-hai once again.
‘I have fixed the second day of next month for my little girl’s journey to the capital,’
said Ru-hai. ‘If you cared to travel with her, it would be convenient for both of us.’
     Yu-cun accepted the suggestion with eager deference. Everything, he thought to
himself, was turning out very satis?factorily. Ru-hai for his part set about preparing
presents for his wife’s family and parting gifts for Yu-cun, all of which Yu-cun in due
course took charge of.
     At first his little pupil could not be persuaded to part from her father; but her
grandmother was insistent that she should go, and Ru-hai added his own reasons.
     ‘I’m half a century old now, my dear, and I have no inten?tion of taking a second
wife; so there will be no one here to act as a mother to you. It isn’t, either, as if you
had sisters who could help to take care of you. You know how often you are poorly.
And you are still very young. It would be a great weight off my mind to know that you
had your Grandmother Jia and your uncles’ girls to fall back on. I really think you
ought to go.’
     After this Dai-yu could only take a tearful leave of her father and go down to the
boat with her nurse and the old women from the Rong mansion who had been sent
to fetch her. There was a separate boat for Yu-cun and a couple of servant-boys to
wait on him, and he too now embarked in the capacity of Dai-yu’s escort.
     In due course they arrived in the capital, and Yu-cun, dressed in his best and with
the two servant-boys at his heels, betook himself to the gate of the Rong mansion
and handed in his visiting-card, on which he had been careful to prefix the word
‘kinsman ’ to his own name. By this time Jia Zheng had already seen his
brother-in-law’s letter, and accorded him an interview without delay.
     Yu-cun’s imposing looks and cultivated speech made an excellent impression on
Jia Zheng, who was in any case always well-disposed towards scholars, and preserved
much of his grandfather’s affability with men of letters and readiness to help them in
any sort of trouble or distress. And since his own in?clinations were in this case
reinforced by his brother-in-law’s strong recommendation, the treatment he
extended to Yu-cun was exceptionally favourable. He exerted himself on his behalf to
such good effect that on the very day his petition was presented Yu-cun’s
reinstatement was approved, and before two months were out he was appointed to
the magistracy of Ying-tian-fu in Nanking. Thither, having chosen a suitable day on
which to commence his journey, and having first taken his leave of Jia Zheng, he now
repaired to take up his duties.
    But of him, for the time being, no more.



*



On the day of her arrival in the capital, Dai-yu stepped ashore to find covered chairs
from the Rong mansion for her and her women and a cart for the luggage ready
waiting on the quay.
     She had often heard her mother say that her Grandmother Jia’s home was not
like other people’s houses. The servants she had been in contact with during the past
few days were comparatively low-ranking ones in the domestic hierarchy, yet the
food they ate, the clothes they wore, and everything about them was quite out of
the ordinary. Dai-yu tried to imagine what the people who employed these superior
beings must be like. When she arrived at their house she would have to watch every
step she took and weigh every word she said, for if she put a foot wrong they would
surely laugh her to scorn.
     Dai-yu got into her chair and was soon carried through the city walls. Peeping
through the gauze panel which served as a window, she could see streets and
buildings more rich and elegant and throngs of people more lively and numerous
than she had ever seen in her life before. After being carried for what seemed a very
great length of time, she saw, on the north front of the east-west street through
which they were passing, two great stone lions crouched one on each side of a triple
gateway whose doors were embellished with animal-heads. In front of the gateway
ten or so splendidly dressed flunkeys sat in a row. The centre of the three gates was
closed, but people were going in and out of the two side ones. There was a board
above the centre gate on which were written in large characters the words:

NING-GUO HOUSE
Founded and Constructed by
Imperial Command

Dai-yu realized that this must be where the elder branch of her grandmother’s family
lived. The chair proceeded some dis?tance more down the street and presently there
was another triple gate, this time with the legend

RONG-GUO HOUSE
above it.
    Ignoring the central gate, her bearers went in by the western entrance and after
traversing the distance of a bow-shot inside, half turned a corner and set the chair
down. The chairs of her female attendants which were following behind were set
down simultaneously and the old women got out. The places of Dai-yu’s bearers
were taken by four handsome, fresh-faced pages of seventeen or eighteen. They
shouldered her chair and, with the old women now following on foot, carried it as far
as an ornamental inner gate. There they set it down again and then retired in
respectful silence. The old women came forward to the front of the chair, held up the
curtain, and helped Dai-yu to get out.
    Each hand resting on the outstretched hand of an elderly attendant, Dai-yu
passed through the ornamental gate into a courtyard which had balustraded loggias
running along its sides and a covered passage-way through the center. The
fore?ground of the courtyard beyond was partially hidden by a screen of polished
marble set in an elaborate red sandalwood frame. Passing round the screen and
through a small reception hall beyond it, they entered the large courtyard of the
man?sion’s principal apartments. These were housed in an imposing five-frame
building resplendent with carved and painted beams and rafters which faced them
across the courtyard. Running along either side of the courtyard were galleries hung
with cages containing a variety of different-coloured parrots, cockatoos, white-eyes,
and other birds. Some gaily-dressed maids were sitting on the steps of the main
building opposite. At the appearance of the visitors they rose to their feet and came
forward with smiling faces to welcome them.
    ‘You’ve come just at the right time! Lady Jia was only this moment asking about
you.’
    Three or four of them ran to lift up the door-curtain, while another of them
announced in loud tones,
    ‘Miss Lin is here!’
    As Dai-yu entered the room she saw a silver-haired old lady advancing to meet
her, supported on either side by a servant. She knew that this must be her
Grandmother Jia and would have fallen on her knees and made her kotow, but before
she could do so her grandmother had caught her in her arms and pressing her to her
bosom with cries of ‘My pet!’ and ‘My poor lamb!’ burst into loud sobs, while all
those present wept in sympathy, and Dai-yu felt herself crying as though she could
never stop. It was some time before those present succeeded in calming them both
down and Dai-yu was at last able to make her kotow.
Grandmother Jia now introduced those present.
‘This is your elder uncle’s wife, Aunt Xing. This is your Uncle Zheng’s wife, Aunt
Wang. This is Li Wan, the wife of your Cousin Zhu, who died.’
Dai-yu kowtowed to each of them in turn.
‘Call the girls!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Tell them that we have a very special visitor
and that they need not do their lessons today.’
There was a cry of ‘Yes ma’am’ from the assembled maids, and two of them went off
to do her bidding.
Presently three girls arrived, attended by three nurses and five or six maids.
The first girl was of medium height and slightly plumpish, with cheeks as white and
firm as a fresh lychee and a nose as white and shiny as soap made from the white
goose-fat. She had a gentle, sweet, reserved manner. To look at her was to love her.
The second girl was rather tall, with sloping shoulders and a slender waist. She had
an oval face under whose well-formed brows large, expressive eyes shot out glances
that sparkled with animation. To look at her was to forget all that was mean or vulgar.

The third girl was undersized and her looks were still some?what babyish and
unformed.
All three were dressed in identical skirts and dresses and wore identical sets of
bracelets and hair ornaments.
Dai-yu rose to meet them and exchanged curtseys and intro?ductions. When she was
seated once more, a maid served tea, and a conversation began on the subject of her
mother: how her illness had started, what doctors had been called in, what
medicines prescribed, what arrangements had been made for the funeral, and how
the mourning had been observed. This conversation had the foreseeable effect of
upsetting the old lady all over again.
‘Of all my girls your mother was the one I loved the best,’ she said, ‘and now she’s
been the first to go, and without my even being able to see her again before the end.
I can’t help being upset!’ And holding fast to Dai-yu’s hand, she once more burst into
tears. The rest of the company did their best to comfort her, until at last she had
more or less re?covered
Everyone’s attention now centred on Dai-yu. They ob?served that although she was
still young, her speech and manner already showed unusual refinement. They also
noticed the frail body which seemed scarcely strong enough to bear the weight of its
clothes, but which yet had an inexpressible grace about it, and realizing that she
must be suffering from some deficiency, asked her what medicine she took for it and
why it was still not better.
‘I have always been like this,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I have been taking medicine ever since I
could eat and been looked at by ever so many well-known doctors, but it has never
done me any good. Once, when I was only three, I can remember a scabby-headed
old monk came and said he wanted to take me away and have me brought up as a
nun; but of course, Mother and Father wouldn’t hear of it. So he said, “Since you are
not prepared to give her up, I am afraid her illness will never get better as long as she
lives. The only way it might get better would be if she were never to hear the sound
of weeping from this day onwards and never to see any relations other than her own
mother and father. Only in those conditions could she get through her life without
trouble.” Of course, he was quite crazy, and no one took any notice of the things he
said. I’m still taking Ginseng Tonic Pills.’
‘Well, that’s handy,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I take the Pills myself. We can easily tell
them to make up a few more each time.’
She had scarcely finished speaking when someone could be heard talking and
laughing in a very loud voice in the inner courtyard behind them.
‘Oh dear! I’m late,’ said the voice. ‘I’ve missed the arrival of our guest.’
‘Everyone else around here seems to go about with bated breath,’ thought Dai-yu.
‘Who can this new arrival be who is so brash and unmannerly?’
Even as she wondered, a beautiful young woman entered from the room behind the
one they were sitting in, surrounded by a bevy of serving women and maids. She was
dressed quite differently from the others present, gleaming like some fairy princess
with sparkling jewels and gay embroideries.
Her chignon was enclosed in a circlet of gold filigree and clustered pearls. It was
fastened with a pin embellished with flying phoenixes, from whose beaks pearls were
suspended on tiny chains.
Her necklet was of red gold in the form of a coiling dragon. Her dress had a fitted
bodice and was made of dark red silk damask with a pattern of flowers and
butterflies in raised gold thread.
Her jacket was lined with ermine. It was of a slate-blue stuff with woven insets in
coloured silks.
Her under-skirt was of a turquoise-coloured imported silk crêpe embroidered with
flowers.
She had, moreover,
eyes like a painted phoenix,
eyebrows like willow-eaves,
a slender form,
seductive grace;
the ever-smiling summer face
of hidden thunders showed no trace;
the ever-bubbling laughter started
almost before the lips were parted.
‘You don’t know her,’ said Grandmother Jia merrily. ‘She’s a holy terror this one.
What we used to call in Nanking a “peppercorn”. You just call her “Peppercorn Feng”.
She’ll know who you mean!’
Dai-yu was at a loss to know how she was to address this Peppercorn Feng until one
of the cousins whispered that it was ‘Cousin Lian’s wife’, and she remembered having
heard her mother say that her elder uncle, Uncle She, had a son called Jia Lian who
was married to the niece of her Uncle Zheng’s wife, Lady Wang. She had been
brought up from earliest childhood just like a boy, and had acquired in the
schoolroom the somewhat boyish-sounding name of Wang Xi-feng. Dai-yu
accordingly smiled and curtseyed, greeting her by her correct name as she did so.
Xi-feng took Dai-yu by the hand and for a few moments scrutinized her carefully from
top to toe before conducting her back to her seat beside Grandmother Jia.
‘She’s a beauty, Grannie dear! If I hadn’t set eyes on her today, I shouldn’t have
believed that such a beautiful creature could exist! And everything about her so
distingué!She doesn’t take after your side of the family, Grannie. She’s more like a Jia.
I don’t blame you for having gone on so about her during the past few days—but
poor little thing! What a cruel fate to have lost Auntie like that!’ and she dabbed at
her eyes with a handkerchief.
‘I’ve only just recovered,’ laughed Grandmother Jia. ‘Don’t you go trying to start me
off again! Besides, your little cousin is not very strong, and we’ve only just managed
to get her cheered up. So let’s have no more of this!’
In obedience to the command Xi-feng at once exchanged her grief for merriment.
‘Yes，of course. It was just that seeing my little cousin here put everything else out
of my mind. It made me want to laugh and cry all at the same time. I’m afraid I quite
forgot about you, Grannie dear. I deserve to be spanked, don’t I?’
She grabbed Dai-yu by the hand.
‘How old are you dear? Have you begun school yet? You mustn’t feel home sick
here. If there’s anything you want to eat or anything you want to play with, just come
and tell me. And you must tell me if any of the maids or the old nannies are nasty to
you.’

Dai-yu made appropriate responses to all of these questions and injunctions.
Xi-feng turned to the servants.
‘Have Miss Lin’s things been brought in yet? How many people did she bring with
her? You’d better hurry up and get a couple of rooms swept out for them to rest in.’
While Xi-feng was speaking, the servants brought in tea and various plates of food,
the distribution of which she pro?ceeded to supervise in person.
Dai-yu noticed her Aunt Wang questioning Xi-feng on the side:
‘Have this month’s allowances been paid out yet?’
‘Yes. By the way, just now I went with some of the women to the upstairs
storeroom at the back to look for that satin. We looked and looked, but we couldn’t
find any like the one you described yesterday. Perhaps you misremembered.’
‘Oh well, if you can’t find it, it doesn’t really matter,’ said Lady Wang. Then, after a
moment’s reflection, ‘You’d better pick out a couple of lengths presently to have
made up into clothes for your little cousin here. If you think of it, send someone
round in the evening to fetch them!’
‘It’s already been seen to. I knew she was going to arrive within a day or two, so I
had some brought out in readiness. They are waiting back at your place for your
approval. If you think they are all right, they can be sent over straight away.’
Lady Wang merely smiled and nodded her head without saying anything.
The tea things and dishes were now cleared away, and Grandmother Jia ordered two
old nurses to take Dai-yu round to see her uncles; but Uncle She’s wife, Lady Xing,
hurriedly rose to her feet and suggested that it would be more convenient if she
were to take her niece round herself.
‘Very well,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You go now, then. There is no need for you to
come back afterwards.’
So having, together with Lady Wang, who was also return?ing to her quarters, taken
leave of the old lady, Lady Xing went off with Dai-yu, attended across the courtyard
as far as the covered way by the rest of the company.
A carriage painted dark blue and hung with kingfisher-blue curtains had been drawn
up in front of the ornamental gateway by some pages. Into this Aunt Xing ascended
hand in hand with Dai-yu. The old women pulled down the carriage blind and
ordered the pages to take up the shafts, the pages drew the carriage into an open
space and harnessed mules to it, and Dai-yu and her aunt were driven out of the
west gate, east?wards past the main gate of the Rong mansion, in again through a big
black-lacquered gate, and up to an inner gate, where they were set down again.
Holding Dai-yu by the hand, Aunt Xing led her into a courtyard in the middle of what
she imagined must once have been part of the mansion’s gardens. This impression
was strengthened when they passed through a third gateway into the quarters
occupied by her uncle and aunt; for here the smaller scale and quiet elegance of the
halls, galleries and loggias were quite unlike the heavy magnificence and impos?ing
grandeur they had just come from, and ornamental trees and artificial rock
formations, all in exquisite taste, were to be seen on every hand.
As they entered the main reception hall, a number of heavily made-up and
expensively dressed maids and concubines, who had been waiting in readiness, came
forward to greet them.
Aunt Xing asked Dai-yu to be seated while she sent a ser?vant to call Uncle She. After
a considerable wait the servant returned with the following message:
‘The Master says he hasn’t been well these last few days, and as it would only upset
them both if he were to see Miss Lin now, he doesn’t feel up to it for the time being.
He says, tell Miss Lin not to grieve and not to feel homesick. She must think of her
grandmother and her aunts as her own family now. He says that her cousins may not
be very clever girls, but at least they should be company for her and help to take her
mind off things. If she finds anything at all here to distress her, she is to speak up at
once. She mustn’t feel like an outsider. She is to make herself completely at home.’
Dai-yu stood up throughout this recital and murmured polite assent whenever assent
seemed indicated. She then sat for about another quarter of an hour before rising to
take her leave. Her Aunt Xing was very pressing that she should have a meal with her
before she went, but Dai-yu smilingly replied that though it was very kind of her aunt
to offer, and though she ought really not to refuse, nevertheless she still had to pay
her respects to her Uncle Zheng, and feared that it would be disrespectful if she were
to arrive late. She hoped that she might accept on another occasion and begged her
aunt to excuse her.
‘In that case, never mind,’ said Lady Xing, and instructed the old nurses to see her
to her Uncle Zheng’s in the same carriage she had come by. Dai-yu formally took her
leave, and Lady Xing saw her as far as the inner gate, where she issued a few more
instructions to the servants and watched her niece’s carriage out of sight before
returning to her rooms.
Presently they re-entered the Rong mansion proper and Dai-yu got down from the
carriage. There was a raised stone walk running all the way up to the main gate,
along which the old nurses now conducted her. Turning right, they led her down a
roofed passage-way along the back of a south-facing hall, then through an inner gate
into a large courtyard.
The big building at the head of the courtyard was connected at each end to galleries
running through the length of the side buildings by means of ‘stag’s head’ roofing
over the corners. The whole formed an architectural unit of greater sumptuous?ness
and magnificence than anything Dai-yu had yet seen that day, from which she
concluded that this must be the main inner hall of the whole mansion.
High overhead on the wall facing her as she entered the hall was a great blue board
framed in gilded dragons, on which was written in large gold characters

THE HALL OF EXALTED FELICITY

with a column of smaller characters at the side giving a date and the words ‘....
written for Our beloved Subject, Jia Yuan,.Duke of Rong-guo’, followed by the
Emperor’s private seal, a device containing the words ‘kingly cares’ and ‘royal brush’
in archaic seal-script.
A long, high table of carved red sandalwood, ornamented with dragons, stood
against the wall underneath. In the centre of this was a huge antique bronze ding,
fully a yard high, covered with a green patina. On the wall above the ding hung a long
vertical scroll with an ink-painting of a dragon emerg?ing from clouds and waves, of
the kind often presented to high court officials in token of their office. The ding was
flanked on one side by a smaller antique bronze vessel with a pattern of gold inlay
and on the other by a crystal bowl. At each side of the table stood a row of eight
yellow cedar-wood armchairs with their backs to the wall; and above the chairs hung,
one on each side, a pair of vertical ebony boards inlaid with a couplet in characters of
gold:
  (on the right-hand one)
May the jewel of learning shine in this house more effulgently than the sun and
moon.
  (on the left-hand one)
May the insignia of honour glitter in these halls more brilliantly than the starry sky.

This was followed by a colophon in smaller characters:

With the Respectful Compliments of your Fellow-
Student, Mu Shi, Hereditary Prince of Dong-an.

Lady Wang did not, however, normally spend her leisure hours in this main reception
hall, but in a smaller room on the east side of the same building. Accordingly the
nurses con?ducted Dai-yu through the door into this side apartment.
Here there was a large kang underneath the window, covered with a scarlet Kashmir
rug. In the middle of the kang was a dark-red bolster with a pattern of medallions in
the form of tiny dragons, and a long russet-green seating strip in the same pattern. A
low rose-shaped table of coloured lacquer-work stood at each side. On the left-hand
one was a small, square, four-legged ding, together with a bronze ladle, metal
chop?sticks, and an incense container. On the right-hand one was a narrow-waisted
Ru-ware imitation gu with a spray of freshly cut flowers in it.
In the part of the room below the kang there was a row of four big chairs against the
east wall. All had footstools in front of them and chair-backs and seat-covers in old
rose brocade sprigged with flowers. There were also narrow side-tables on which tea
things and vases of flowers were arranged, besides other furnishings which it would
be superfluous to enumerate.
The old nurses invited Dai-yu to get up on the kang; but guessing that the brocade
cushions arranged one on each side near the edge of it must be her uncle’s and
aunt’s places, she deemed it more proper to sit on one of the chairs against the wall
below. The maids in charge of the apartment served tea, and as she sipped it Dai-yu
observed that their clothing, make?up, and deportment were quite different from
those of the maids she had seen so far in other parts of the mansion.
Before she had time to finish her tea, a smiling maid came in wearing a dress of red
damask and a black silk sleeveless jacket which had scalloped borders of some
coloured material.
‘The Mistress says will Miss Lin come over to the other side, please.’
The old nurses now led Dai-yu down the east gallery to a reception room at the side
of the courtyard. This too had a kang. It was bisected by a long, low table piled with
books and tea things. A much-used black satin back-rest was pushed up against the
east wall. Lady Wang was seated on a black satin cushion and leaning against another
comfortable-looking back-rest of black satin somewhat farther forward on the
opposite side.
Seeing her niece enter, she motioned her to sit opposite her on the kang, but Dai-yu
felt sure that this must be her Uncle Zheng’s place. So, having observed a row of
three chairs near the kang with covers of flower-sprigged brocade which looked as
though they were in fairly constant use, she sat upon one of those instead. Only after
much further pressing from her aunt would she get up on the kang, and even then
she would only sit beside her and not in the position of honour opposite.
‘Your uncle is in retreat today,’ said Lady Wang. ‘He will see you another time.
There is, however, something I have got to talk to you about. The three girls are very
well-behaved children, and in future, when you are studying or sewing together, even
if once in a while they may grow a bit high-spirited, I can depend on them not to go
too far. There is only one thing that worries me. I have a little monster of a son who
tyrannizes over all the rest of this household. He has gone off to the temple today in
fulfillment of a vow and is not yet back; but you will see what I mean this evening.
The thing to do is never to take any notice of him. None of your cousins dare provoke
him.’
Dai-yu had long ago been told by her mother that she had a boy cousin who was
born with a piece of jade in his mouth and who was exceptionally wild and naughty.
He hated study and liked to spend all his time in the women’s apartments with the
girls, but because Grandmother Jia doted on him so much, no one ever dared to
correct him. She realized that it must be this cousin her aunt was now referring to.
‘Do you mean the boy born with the jade, Aunt?’ she asked. ‘Mother often told me
about him at home. She told me that he was one year older than me and that his
name was Bao-yu. But she said that though he was very willful, he always behaved
very nicely to girls. Now that I am here, I suppose I shall be spending all my time with
my girl cousins and not in the same part of the house as the boys. Surely there will be
no danger of my provoking him?’
Lady Wang gave a rueful smile. ‘You little know how things are here! Bao-yu is a law
unto himself. Because your grandmother is so fond of him she has thoroughly spoiled
him. When he was little he lived with the girls, so with the girls he remains now. As
long as they take no notice of him, things run quietly enough. But if they give him the
least encouragement, he at once becomes excitable, and then there is no end to the
mischief he may get up to. That is why I counsel you to ignore him. He can be all
honey-sweet words one minute and ranting and raving like a lunatic the next. So
don’t believe anything he says.’
Dai-yu promised to follow her aunt’s advice.
Just then a maid came in with a message that ‘Lady Jia said it was time for dinner’,
whereupon Lady Wang took Dai-yu by the hand and hurried her out through a back
door. Passing along a verandah which ran beneath the rear eaves of the hall they
came to a corner gate through which they passed into an alley-way running north
and south. At the south end it was traversed by a narrow little building with a short
passage-way running through its middle. At the north end was a white ?painted
screen wall masking a medium-sized gateway leading to a small courtyard in which
stood a very little house.
‘That,’ said Lady Wang, pointing to the little house, ‘is where your Cousin Lian’s
wife, Wang Xi-feng, lives, in case you want to see her later on. She is the person to
talk to if there is anything you need.’
There were a few young pages at the gate of the courtyard who, when they saw Lady
Wang coming, all stood to attention with their hands at their sides.
Lady Wang now led Dai-yu along a gallery, running from east to west, which brought
them out into the courtyard be?hind Grandmother Jia’s apartments. Entering these
by a back entrance, they found a number of servants waiting there who, as soon as
they saw Lady Wang, began to arrange the table and chairs for dinner. The ladies of
the house themselves took part in the service. Li Wan brought in the cups, Xi-feng
laid out the chopsticks, and Lady Wang brought in the soup.
The table at which Grandmother Jia presided, seated alone on a couch, had two
empty chairs on either side. Xi-feng tried to seat Dai-yu in the one on the left nearer
to her grand?mother —an honour which she strenuously resisted until her
grandmother explained that her aunt and her elder cousins’ wives would not be
eating with them, so that, since she was a guest, the place was properly hers. Only
then did she ask per?mission to sit, as etiquette prescribed. Grandmother Jia then
ordered Lady Wang to be seated. This was the cue for the three girls to ask
permission to sit. Ying-chun sat in the first place on the right opposite Dai-yu,
Tan-chun sat second on the left, and Xi-chun sat second on the right.
While Li Wan and Xi-feng stood by the table helping to distribute food from the
dishes, maids holding fly-whisks, spittoons, and napkins ranged themselves on either
side. In addition to these, there were numerous other maids and serving-women in
attendance in the outer room, yet not so much as a cough was heard throughout the
whole of the meal.
When they had finished eating, a maid served each diner with tea on a little tray.
Dai-yu’s parents had brought their daughter up to believe that good health was
founded on care?ful habits, and in pursuance of this principle, had always in?sisted
that after a meal one should allow a certain interval to elapse before taking tea in
order to avoid indigestion. How?ever, she could see that many of the rules in this
household were different from the ones she had been used to at home; so, being
anxious to conform as much as possible, she accepted the tea. But as she did so,
another maid preferred a spittoon, from which she inferred that the tea was for
rinsing her mouth with. And it was not, in fact, until they had all rinsed out their
mouths and washed their hands that another lot of tea was served, this time for
drinking.
Grandmother Jia now dismissed her lady servers, observing that she wished to enjoy
a little chat with her young grand children without the restraint of their grown-up
presence.
Lady Wang obediently rose to her feet and, after exchanging a few pleasantries, went
out, taking Li Wan and Wang Xi-feng with her.
Grandmother Jia asked Dai-yu what books she was studying.
‘The Four Books,’ said Dai-yu, and inquired in turn what books her cousins were
currently engaged on.
‘Gracious, child, they don’t study books,’ said her grand?mother; ‘they can barely
read and write!’
While they were speaking, a flurry of footsteps could be heard outside and a maid
came in to say that Bao-yu was back.
‘I wonder,’ thought Dai-yu, ‘just what sort of graceless creature this Bao-yu is going
to be!’
The young gentleman who entered in answer to her un?spoken question had a small
jewel-encrusted gold coronet on the top of his head and a golden headband low
down over his brow in the form of two dragons playing with a large pearl.
He was wearing a narrow-sleeved, full-skirted robe of dark red material with a
pattern of flowers and butterflies in two shades of gold. It was confined at the waist
with a court girdle of coloured silks braided at regular intervals into elaborate clusters
of knotwork and terminating in long tassels.
Over the upper part of his robe he wore a jacket of slate-blue Japanese silk damask
with a raised pattern of eight large medallions on the front and with tasselled
borders.
On his feet he had half-length dress boots of black satin with thick white soles.
As to his person, he had:
a face like the moon of Mid-Autumn,
a complexion like flowers at dawn,
a hairline straight as a knife-cut,
eyebrows that might have been painted by an artist’s brush,
a shapely nose, and
eyes clear as limpid pools,
that even in anger seemed to smile,
and, as they glared, beamed tenderness the while.
Around his neck he wore a golden torque in the likeness of a dragon and a woven
cord of coloured silks to which the famous jade was attached.
Dai-yu looked at him with astonishment. How strange! How very strange! It was as
though she had seen him somewhere before, he was so extraordinarily familiar.
Bao-yu went straight past her and saluted his grandmother, who told him to come
after he had seen his mother, whereupon he turned round and walked straight out
again.
Quite soon he was back once more, this time dressed in a completely different outfit.
The crown and circlet had gone. She could now see that his side hair was dressed in a
number of small braids plaited with red silk, which were drawn round to join the long
hair at the back in a single large queue of glistening jet black, fastened at intervals
from the nape downwards with four enormous pearls and ending in a jewelled gold
clasp. He had changed his robe and jacket for a rather more worn-looking
rose-coloured gown, sprigged with flowers. He wore the gold torque and his jade as
before, and she observed that the collection of objects round his neck had been
further augmented by a padlock-shaped amulet and a lucky charm. A pair of
ivy-coloured embroidered silk trousers were partially visible beneath his gown, thrust
into black and white socks trimmed with brocade. In place of the formal boots he
was wearing thick-soled crimson slippers.
She was even more struck than before by his fresh com?plexion. The cheeks might
have been brushed with powder and the lips touched with rouge, so bright was their
natural colour.
His glance was soulful,
yet from his lips the laughter often leaped;
a world of charm upon that brow was heaped;
a world of feeling from those dark eyes peeped.
In short, his outward appearance was very fine. But appear?ances can be misleading.
A perceptive poet has supplied two sets of verses, to be sung to the tune of Moon On
West River, which contain a more accurate appraisal of our hero than the foregoing
descriptions.

1

        Oft-times he sought out what would make him sad;
        Sometimes an idiot seemed and sometimes mad.
        Though outwardly a handsome sausage-skin,
        He proved to have but sorry meat within.
        A harum-scarum, to all duty blind,
        A doltish mule, to study disinclined;
        His acts outlandish and his nature queer;
        Yet not a whit cared he how folk might jeer!
2
        Prosperous, he could not play his part with grace,
        Nor, poor, bear hardship with a smiling face.
        So shamefully the precious hours he’d waste
        That both indoors and out he was disgraced.
        For uselessness the world’s prize he might bear;
        His gracelessness in history has no peer.
        Let gilded youths who every dainty sample
        Not imitate this rascal’s dire example!


‘Fancy changing your clothes before you have welcomed the visitor!’ Grandmother
Jia chided indulgently on seeing Bao-yu back again. ‘Aren’t you going to pay your
respects to your cousin?’
Bao-yu had already caught sight of a slender, delicate girl whom he surmised to be
his Aunt Lin’s daughter and quickly went over to greet her. Then, returning to his
place and taking a seat, he studied her attentively. How different she seemed from
the other girls he knew!
Her mist-wreathed brows at first seemed to frown, yet were not frowning;
Her passionate eyes at first seemed to smile, yet were not merry.
Habit had given a melancholy cast to her tender face;
Nature had bestowed a sickly constitution on her delicate frame.
Often the eyes swam with glistening tears;
Often the breath came in gentle gasps.
In stillness she made one think of a graceful flower reflected in the water;
In motion she called to mind tender willow shoots caressed by the wind.
She had more chambers in her heart than the martyred Bi Gan;
And suffered a tithe more pain in it than the beautiful Xi Shi.
Having completed his survey, Bao-yu gaved a laugh.
‘I have seen this cousin before.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘How could you possibly have done?’
‘Well, perhaps not,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but her face seems so familiar that I have the
impression of meeting her again after a long separation.’
‘All the better,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘That means that you should get on well
together.’
Bao-yu moved over again and, drawing a chair up beside Dai-yu, recommenced his
scrutiny.
Presently: ‘Do you study books yet, cousin?’
‘No,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I have only been taking lessons for a year or so. I can barely read
and write.’
‘What’s your name?’
Dai-yu told him.
‘What’s your school-name?’
‘I haven’t got one.’
Bao-yu laughed. ‘I’ll give you one, cousin. I think “Frowner” would suit you perfectly.’
‘Where’s your reference?’ said Tan-chun.
‘In the Encyclopedia of Men and Objects Ancient and Modern it says that
somewhere in the West there is a mineral called “dai” which can be used instead of
eye-black for painting the eye?brows with. She has this “dai” in her name and she
knits her brows together in a little frown. I think it’s a splendid name for her!’
‘I expect you made it up,’ said Tan-chun scornfully.
‘What if I did?’ said Bao-yu. ‘There are lots of made-up things in books—apart from
the Four Books, of course.’
He returned to his interrogation of Dai-yu.
‘Have you got a jade?’
The test of the company were puzzled, hut Dai-yu at once divined that he was asking
her if she too had a jade like the one he was born with.
‘No,’ said Dal-yu. ‘That jade of yours is a very rare object. You can’t expect
everybody to have one.’
This sent Bao-yu off instantly into one of his mad fits. Snatching the jade from his
neck he hurled it violently on the floor as if to smash it and began abusing it
passionately.
‘Rare object! Rare object! What’s so lucky about a stone that can’t even tell which
people are better than others? Beastly thing! I don’t want it!’
The maids all seemed terrified and rushed forward to pick it up, while Grandmother
Jia clung to Bao-yu in alarm.
‘Naughty, naughty boy! Shout at someone or strike them if you like when you are in
a nasty temper, but why go smashing that precious thing that your very life depends
on?’
‘None of the girls has got one,’ said Bao-yu, his face stream?ing with tears and
sobbing hysterically. ‘Only I have got one. It always upsets me. And now this new
cousin comes here who is as beautiful as an angel and she hasn’t got one either; so I
know it can’t be any good.’
‘Your cousin did have a jade once,’ said Grandmother Jia, coaxing him like a little
child, ‘but because when Auntie died she couldn’t bear to leave her little girl behind,
they had to let her take the jade with her instead. In that way your cousin could show
her mamma how much she loved her by letting the jade be buried with her; and at
the same time, whenever Auntie’s spirit looked at the jade, it would be just like
looking at her own little girl again.
‘So when your cousin said she hadn’t got one, it was only because she didn’t want
to boast about the good, kind thing she did when she gave it to her mamma. Now
you put yours on again like a good boy, and mind your mother doesn’t find out how
naughty you have been.’
So saying, she took the jade from the hands of one of the maids and hung it round
his neck for him. And Bao-yu, after reflecting for a moment or two on what she had
said, offered no further resistance.
At this point some of the older women came to inquire what room Dai-yu was to
sleep in.
‘Move Bao-yu into the closet-bed with me,’ said Grand?mother Jia, ‘and put Miss
Lin for the time being in the green muslin summer-bed. We had better wait until
spring when the last of the cold weather is over before seeing about the rooms for
them and getting them settled permanently.’
‘Dearest Grannie,’ said Bao-yu pleadingly, ‘I should be perfectly all right next to the
summer-bed. There’s no need to move me into your room. I should only keep you
awake.’
Grandmother Jia, after a moment’s reflection, gave her consent. She further gave
instructions that Dai-yu and Bao-yu were each to have one nurse and one maid to
sleep with them. The rest of their servants were to do night duty by rota in the
adjoining room. Xi-feng had already sent across some lilac-coloured hangings,
brocade quilts, satin coverlets and the like for Dai-yu’s bedding.
Dai-yu had brought only two of her own people with her from home. One was her
old wet-nurse Nannie Wang, the other was a little ten-year-old maid called
Snowgoose. Con?sidering Snowgoose too young and irresponsible and Nannie Wang
too old and decrepit to be of much real service, Grand?mother Jia gave Dai-yu one of
her own maids, a body-servant of the second grade called Nightingale. She also gave
orders that Dai-yu and Bao-yu were to be attended in other respects exactly like the
three girls: that is to say, apart from the one wet-nurse, each was to have four other
nurses to act as chaper?ones, two maids as body-servants to attend to their washing,
dressing, and so forth, and four or five maids for dusting and cleaning, running
errands and general duties.
These arrangements completed, Nannie Wang and Night?ingale accompanied Dai-yu
to bed inside the tent-like summer?-bed, while Bao-yu’s wet-nurse Nannie Li and his
chief maid Aroma settled him down for the night in a big bed on the other side of the
canopy.

Like Nightingale, Aroma had previously been one of Grand?mother Jia’s own maids.
Her real name was Pearl. Bao-yu’s grandmother, fearful that the maids who already
waited on her darling boy could not be trusted to look after him properly, had picked
out Pearl as a girl of tried and conspicuous fidelity and put her in charge over them. It
was Bao-yu who was responsible for the curious name ‘Aroma’. Discovering that
Pearl’s surname was Hua, which means ‘Flowers’, and having recently come across
the line

The flowers’ aroma breathes of hotter days

in a book of poems, he told his grandmother that he wanted to call his new maid
‘Aroma’, so ‘Aroma’ her name thence?forth became.
Aroma had a certain dogged streak in her nature which had made her utterly devoted
to Grandmother Jia as long as she was Grandmother Jia’s servant, but which caused
her to become just as exclusively and single-mindedly devoted to Bao-yu when her
services were transferred to him. Since she found his character strange and
incomprehensible, her simple devotion frequently impelled her to remonstrate with
him, and when, as invariably happened, he took not the least notice of what she said,
she was worried and hurt.
That night, when Bao-yu and Nannie Li were already asleep, Aroma could hear that
Dai-yu and Nightingale on their side of the canopy had still not settled down, so,
when she had finished taking down her hair and making herself ready for bed, she
tiptoed through the muslin curtains and in a friendly way inquired what was the
matter. Dai-yu invited her to sit down, and when she had seated herself on the edge
of the bed, Nightingale proceeded to tell her what was troubling her new mistress.
‘Miss Lin is all upset. She has just been crying her eyes out because she says she
only just arrived here today, and yet already she has started young hopeful off on one
of his turns. She says if that jade had been really smashed, it would have been all her
fault. That’s what she’s so upset about. I’ve had no end of a job trying to comfort her.’
‘You mustn’t take on so, Miss,’ said Aroma. ‘You’ll see him do much stranger things
than that before he’s finished. If you allow yourself to feel hurt every time he carries
on like that, he will always be hurting you. Try not to be so sensitive; Miss!’
Dai-yu thanked her and promised to bear in mind what she had said, and after talking
a little longer, they all settled down and went to sleep.

*

Rising early next day, they visited Grandmother Jia to wish her a good morning and
then went over to Lady Wang’s. They found her closeted with Wang Xi-feng, deep in
discus?sion of a letter which had just arrived from Nanking, and attended by two
women who had come with a message from Lady Wang’s elder brother and
sister-in-law. Tan-chun and the girls told Dai-yu, who knew nothing of the matter
under discussion, that they were talking about Xue Pan, the son of their Aunt Xue
who lived in Nanking.
It seemed that Xue Pan, relying on wealth and family pull to protect him from the
consequences, had taken another man’s life. The case was at present under
investigation by the Ying-?tian-fu yamen. Their uncle Wang Zi-teng had been
informed of it, and had sent these messengers to the members of the family in the
Rong mansion to suggest that they should invite Xue Pan to the capital.
But the outcome of this discussion will be dealt with in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 4

The Bottle-gourd girl meets an
unfortunate young man
And the Bottle-gourd monk settles a
protracted lawsuit



When Dai-yu and the girls went to call on Lady Wang, they found her in the midst of
discussing family affairs with the messengers from her elder brother and his wife and
heard talk of their aunt’s family in Nanking being involved in a case of manslaughter.
Since Lady Wang was obviously preoccupied with this matter, the girls went off to call
on Li Wan.
Li Wan’s husband Jia Zhu had died young, but fortunately not without issue. He left
her a son called Jia Lan who was now’ just five years old and had already begun his
schooling. Like most of the Jia women, Li Wan was the daughter of a dis?tinguished
Nanking official. Her father, Li Shou-zhong, had been a Director of Education.
Up to Li Shou-zhong’s time, all members of the clan, in?cluding the women, had been
given a first-class education; but when Li Shou-zhong became head of the family, he
founded his educational policy for girls on the good old maxim ‘a stupid woman is a
virtuous one’ and, when he had a daughter of his own, refused to let her engage in
serious study. She was permitted to work her way through The Four Books for Girls
and Lives of Noble Women, so that she might be able to recog?nize a few characters
and be familiar with some of the models of female virtue of former ages; but
overriding importance was to be attached to spinning and sewing, and even her
name ‘Wan’, which means a kind of silk, was intended to symbolize her dedication to
the needle.
Thanks to her upbringing, this young widow living in the midst of luxury and
self-indulgence was able to keep herself like the ‘withered tree and dead ashes’ of
the philosopher, shutting out everything that did not concern her and attending only
to the duties of serving her husband’s parents and bringing up her child. Whatever
leisure this left her was devoted to her little sister-in-law and cousins, accompanying
them at their embroidery or hearing them recite their lessons.
With such gentle companions to console her, Dai-yu, though a stranger and far from
home, soon had nothing apart from her old father that she need worry about.
*

Let us now turn to the affairs of Jia Yu-cun, newly installed in the yamen at
Ying-tian-fu.
No sooner had he arrived at his new post than a case in?volving manslaughter was
referred to his tribunal. It con?cerned two parties in dispute over the purchase of a
slave-girl. Neither had been willing to give way to the other, and in the ensuing affray
one of the parties had been wounded and had subsequently died. After reading the
papers in the case, Yu-cun summoned the plaintiff for questioning and received from
him the following account of what had happened:
‘The murdered man was my master, Your Honour. Although he did not realize it at
the time, the girl he purchased had been kidnapped by the man who was selling her.
My master paid him in advance, and arranged to receive the girl into his house three
days from the date of purchase, the third day being a lucky day. The kidnapper,
having already pocketed my young master’s money, then quietly went off and sold
her again to Xue. When we found this out, we went along to seize him and to collect
the girl.
‘But unfortunately this Xue turned out to be a powerful Nanking boss, who
evidently thought that by money and influence he could get away with anything. He
set a crowd of his henchmen on to my young master and beat him up so badly that
he died.
‘Xue and his henchmen have now disappeared without trace, leaving only a few
retainers who were not involved in the crime. But though it is a year since I first
brought this charge, no one has yet done anything to help me. I beseech Your Honour
to arrest the criminals and to uphold the course of justice! Both the living and the
dead will be everlastingly grateful to you if you do!’
‘This is monstrous!’ said Yu-cun in a towering rage. ‘Am I to understand that a man
can be beaten to death and the murderer walk off scot-free with nobody lifting a
finger to arrest him?’ and he took up a warrant and was on the point of sending his
runners to seize the murderer’s dependants and bring them to court so that they
might be put to the torture, when he observed one of the ushers signalling to him
with his eyes not to issue the warrant. His resolution somewhat shaken, he put it
down again and adjourned to his private chambers, dismissing everyone except the
usher, whom he ordered to remain behind in attendance.
When they were alone together the usher, with a broad smile on his face, came
forward and touched his hand and knee to the ground in the Manchu salute.
‘Your Honour has gone a long way up in the world during these past eight or nine
years! I don’t expect you would remember me!’
‘Your face is certainly familiar,’ said Yu-cun, ‘but for the moment I simply can’t place
it.’
The usher smiled again. ‘Has Your Honour forgotten the place you started from? Do
you remember nothing of the old times in Bottle-gourd Temple?’
With a start of recognition, Yu-cun remembered. The usher had been a little novice
in the temple where he once lodged
Finding himself homeless after the fire, and bethinking him?self that a post in a
yamen was a fine, gentlemanly way of earn?ing a living, and being furthermore
heartily sick of the rigours of monastic life, the little novice had taken advantage of
his youth to grow his hair again and get himself a post as an usher. Small wonder that
Yu-cun had failed to recognize him!
‘Ah, so it was an old acquaintance!’ said Yu-cun, grasping him warmly by the hand
and urging him to sit down for a chat. But the usher would not be seated.
‘Come,’ said Yu-cun, ‘as a friend of my early, hard-up days you are entitled to. After
all, this is a private room. Why not?’
The usher permitted himself to perch one of his haunches sideways on the edge of a
chair.
‘Tell me,’ said Yu-cun, ‘why did you stop me issuing that warrant just now?’
‘Your Honour is new to this post. Surely you must have provided yourself before
you left with a copy of the Mandarin’s Life-Preserver for this province?’
‘What is the Mandarin’s Lift-Preserver?’ Yu-cun inquired curiously.
‘Nowadays every provincial official carries a private hand-list with the names of all
the richest, most influential people in his area. There is one for every province. They
list those families which are so powerful that if you were ever to run up against one
of them unknowingly, not only your job, but perhaps even your life might be in
danger. That’s why they are called “life-preservers”.
‘Now take this Xue you were dealing with just now. Your Honour couldn’t possibly
try conclusions with him! Why do you suppose this case has remained unsettled for
so long? It’s a straightforward enough case. The reason is simply that none of your
predecessors dared touch it because of the unpleasant?ness and loss of face it would
have caused them.’
While he was speaking he had been fishing for a copy of the Mandarin’s
Lift-Preserver in his pocket. This he now presented to Yu-cun for his inspection. It
contained a set of doggerel verses in which were listed the big families and most
powerful magnates of the area in which he was working. It went some-thing like this:
Shout hip hurrah
For the Nanking Jia!
They weigh their gold out
By the jar.
The Ah-bang Palace
Scrapes the sky,
But it could not house
The Nanking Shi.
The King of the Ocean
Goes along,
When he’s short of gold beds,
To the Nanking Wang.
The Nanking Xue
So rich are they,
To count their money
Would take all day...
Before Yu-cun had time to read further, a warning chime from the inner gate and a
shout outside the door announced the arrival of a Mr Wang on an official call. Yu-cun
hastily donned the hat and robe of office which he had temporarily laid aside and
went out to meet the visitor. About the length of time it would take to eat a meal
elapsed before he returned and re?sumed his conversation with the usher.
‘Those four families,’ said the usher in answer to a question from Yu-cun, ‘are all
closely connected with each other. A loss for one is a loss for all. A gain for one is a
gain for all. The Xue who has been charged with the manslaughter is one of the
“Nanking Xue so rich are they”. Not only can he count on the support of the other
three Nanking families, he also has any number of family friends and connections of
his own both at the capital and in the provinces. Now who are you going to arrest?’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Yu-cun with an uneasy laugh, ‘but how am I going to settle
this case? Incidentally, I assume you know perfectly well where the criminal is
hiding?’
‘I wouldn’t deceive Your Honour,’ replied the usher with a grin, ‘not only do I know
where the criminal has gone but I also know who the kidnapper is and all about the
poor devil who was killed. Let me tell you the whole story.
‘The man who was killed was a poor country squire’s son called Feng Yuan. His
father and mother were both dead and he had no brothers. He lived off the income
of a very small estate. He was eighteen or nineteen when he died. He was a
confirmed queer and not interested in girls. Which shows that the whole business
must have been fated, because no sooner did he set eyes on this girl than he at once
fell in love with her—swore he would never have anything more to do with boys and
never have any other woman but her. That was the idea of this waiting three days
before she came to him. To make it seem more like a wedding and less like a sale.
‘What he couldn’t foresee, of course, was that the kid?napper would use this
interval to resell her on the sly to Xue, hoping to pocket the money from both parties
and then do a flit. Only he didn’t get away with it. The two parties nabbed him before
he could disappear and beat the daylights out of him. Both refused to take back their
money, and both insisted that they wanted the girl. It was at this point that our
young friend Xue called for his roughs to get to work on Feng Yuan. They beat him till
he was hardly recognizable. Then they picked him up and carried him home. He died
three days later.
‘Now long before any of this happened, young Xue had made arrangements for a
journey to the capital. So after killing Feng and carrying off the girl, he set off with his
family, calm as you please, on the appointed day. There was no question of his
running away because of the killing. In his eyes a trifling matter like taking another
man’s life was something for his junior clansmen or the servants to clear up in his
absence.
‘But never mind him. Who do you think the slave-girl is?’
‘How in the world should I know?’ said Yu-cun.
The usher smiled maliciously. ‘You ought to, Your Honour! She is your great
benefactress —Ying-lian, the little daughter of Mr Zhen, who used to live next door
to Bottle-gourd Temple.’
‘Good gracious!’ said Yu-cun in astonishment. ‘I had heard that she was kidnapped
at the age of five. But how did she come to be sold so long after the kidnapping?’
‘This type of kidnapper specializes in kidnapping very young girls and rearing them
until they are twelve or thirteen for sale in other parts of the country. When she was
little we used to play with Ying-lian at the temple nearly every day, so I knew her very
well; and when I saw her again, even though it was after an interval of seven or eight
years, I could tell it was her. She’d grown into a little woman in the meantime, but her
features were still the same; and to confirm it there was a tiny red birthmark right in
the middle of her brow which I remembered.
‘By a strange coincidence the kidnapper had rented one of my rooms, and one day
when he was out I put it to her who she was. But she said she was scared of being
beaten and nothing would induce her to talk. She just kept insisting that the
kidnapper was her real father, selling her because he had no money to pay his debts
with. I kept on at her, cajoling and persuading, and in the end she broke down and
cried. Said she didn’t remember anything about her childhood. But there’s no doubt
in my mind. It’s her, all right.
‘The day young Feng met her and paid out the money for her, the kidnapper got
drunk, and she opened up to me a bit. She was feeling very relieved. She said, “Today
I think my tribulations are at last coming to an end.” But then later, when she heard
that she wasn’t to be installed until after another three days, she began to look
worried and despondent again. I felt truly sorry for her, and sent the wife round to
have a talk with her while the kidnapper was out and give her a bit of
encouragement.
‘The wife said to her, “Mr Feng’s insistence on waiting three days before taking you
in shows that he doesn’t intend to treat you like a servant. Besides,” she said, “he’s a
very nice, handsome gentleman, and quite comfortably off. Normally he doesn’t like
the fair sex, yet here he is spending everything he has on your purchase. You can tell
from that,” she said, “how much he must care for you. You only have to be patient for
another day or two,” she said. “You’ve no cause to be down?cast.”
‘Well, that seemed to cheer her up a bit, and she began to feel that life was going
to be worth living.
‘But only the day after that, by the most accursed stroke of bad luck which no one
could possibly have foreseen, she was sold to Xue. Now if it had been anyone else, it
wouldn’t have mattered so much, but this young Xue, whose nickname is the Oaf
King, is the world’s most bad-tempered bully; and having spent money like water on
buying the girl only to find that she wasn’t willing, he knocked her about until she
was half un?conscious and dragged her off with him more dead than alive. Whether
she’s alive or dead now, I have no idea.
‘And young Feng is really to be pitied! After a brief moment of happiness, before
anything had come his way, he spent all his money and laid down his life for nothing!’
Yu-cun sighed sympathetically. ‘Their meeting cannot have been coincidental. It must
have been the working out of some destiny. An atonement. Otherwise, how is one to
account for Feng Yuan’s sudden affection for that particular girl?
‘And Ying-lian, after all those years of ill-treatment at the hands of her kidnapper,
suddenly seeing a road to freedom opening in front of her—for she was a girl of
feeling, and there is no doubt that they would have made a fine couple if they had
succeeded in coming together—and then for this to have happened!
‘And even though Xue may be far wealthier and better-placed than Feng was, a
man like that is sure to have numbers of concubines and paramours and to be
licentious and de?bauched in his habits—quite incapable of concentrating all his
affections on one girl as Feng Yuan would have done.
‘A real case of an ideal romance on the one hand and a pair of unlucky young
things on the other adding up to make a tragedy!
‘But a truce to this discussion of other people’s affairs! Let us rather consider how
this case is to be settled!’
‘Your Honour used to be decisive enough in the old days,’ said the usher with a
smile. ‘What has become of your old resolution today? Now, I was told that your
promotion to this post was due to the combined influence of the Jias and the Wangs;
and this Xue Pan is related to the Jias by marriage. Why not trim your sails to the
wind in your handling of this case? Why not make a virtue of necessity by doing them
a favour which will stand you in good stead next time you see them?’
‘What you say is, of course, entirely correct,’ said Yu-cun. ‘But there is, after all, a
human life involved in this case; and you have to remember that I have only just been
restored to office by an act of Imperial clemency. I really cannot bring myself to
pervert justice for private ends at the very mo?ment when I ought to be doing my
utmost to show my gratitude.’
The usher smiled coldly. ‘What Your Honour says is no doubt very right and proper,
but it won’t wash. Not the way things are in the world today! Haven’t you heard the
old say?ing “The man of spirit shapes his actions to the passing moment”? And
there’s another old saying: “It is the mark of a gentleman to avoid what is
inauspicious”. If you were to act in accordance with what you have just said, not only
would you not be able to show your gratitude to the Emperor, but also you would
probably put your own life in danger. If I were you, I should think very carefully
before you do any?thing.’
Yu-cun lowered his head in thought. After a very long pause he asked, ‘What do you
think I ought to do?’
‘I’ve thought of a very good solution,’ said the usher. ‘When you open court
tomorrow, you should make a great display of authority. Send out writs, issue
warrants for arrest, and so forth. You won’t, of course, be able to arrest the cul?prits,
and the plaintiffs will certainly not allow the matter to rest there; so what you do
then is to arrest some of Xue’s clans?men and servants for questioning. But in the
meantime I shall have got to work on them on the side and arranged for them to
report that Xue has died of sudden illness. This can be supported by the affidavits of
the whole Xue clan and the people living in the neighbourhood.
‘Then Your Honour has it put about that you have a gift for the planchette. You
have an altar set up in the court and a planchette board installed on it and you issue
an open invita?tion to any members of the public who want to to attend a séance.
Then you say, “The spirit control gives judgment as follows:
‘“The dead man, Feng Yuan, owed a debt of karma to Xue Pan from a former life
and ‘meeting his enemy in a narrow way’, paid for it with his life. The sudden,
unexplained illness which struck down Xue Pan was caused by the vengeful ghost of
Feng Yuan come to claim its own. Since the tragedy was entirely due to the behaviour
of the kidnapper, the kidnapper should be dealt with according to the full rigour of
the law; but apart from him, all other parties are exonerated...” and so on and so
forth.
‘I shall secretly instruct the kidnapper to make a full con?fession, and when the
public see that the judgment given by the planchette tallies with the confession
made by the kidnapper, they will naturally have no suspicions.
‘Then you award the Fengs compensation to cover funeral expenses and so on. And
since the Xues are rolling in money, you can say anything you like. Five hundred, a
thousand—it doesn’t matter. There’s no one of any importance on the Feng side, and
in any case they’re mainly in this for the money. So once they have got their
compensation, they shouldn’t give you any further trouble.
‘What about that for a plan, Your Honour? You just think it over!’
Yu-cun laughed. ‘Too risky! Let me turn it over in my mind a little longer. The main
thing is to think of something that will stop people talking.’
And with this observation the two men concluded their discussion.
At next day’s session a group of well-known associates of the wanted man were
brought in and subjected by Yu-cun to careful questioning. It emerged, as the usher
had said, that the Fengs were few in number and had brought this action solely in the
hope of gaining some compensation, and that it was only because the Xues had, with
the arrogance of the very rich and very powerful, refused to pay a penny, that the
case had been brought to a standstill.
By a judicious bending of the law to suit the circumstances, Yu-cun managed to arrive
at some sort of judgment whereby the plaintiffs received substantial compensation
and went off tolerably well satisfied. He then hurriedly drafted and sent off two
letters, one to Jia Zheng and one to Wang Zi-teng, Commandant, Metropolitan
Barracks, in which he merely stated that their ‘nephew’s affair had been settled and
there was no further cause for concern’.
Fearful that the now usher and quondam novice of Bottle-gourd Temple might talk to
others about the days when he was an obscure and impoverished student, Yu-cun for
some time went about in great discomfort of mind. Finally, how?ever, he managed to
catch him out in some misdemeanour or other and have him drafted for military
service on a frontier outpost, after which he felt able to breathe freely again.



*

But now no more of Yu-cun. Let us turn instead to Young Xue, the man who
purchased Ying-lian and had Feng Yuan beaten to death. He was a native of Nanking
and came of a refined and highly cultivated family, but having lost his father in
infancy and been, as sole remaining scion of the stock, exces?sively indulged by a
doting widowed mother, he had grown up into a useless lout. The family was
immensely wealthy. As one of the official Court Purveyors they received money from
the Privy Purse with which to make purchases for the Imperial Household.
Xue Pan, to give him his full name, was a naturally ex?travagant young man with an
insolent turn of speech. He had been educated after a fashion, but could barely read
and write. He devoted the greater part of his time to cock-fighting, horse-racing, and
outings to places of scenic interest. Though an Imperial Purveyor, he was wholly
innocent of business skill and savoir-faire; and though, for his father’s and
grand?father’s sake, he was allowed to register at the Ministry and receive regular
payments of grain and money, everything else was looked after for him by the clerks
and factors of the family business.
Xue Pan’s widowed mother was a younger half-sister of Wang Zi-teng, at that time
Commandant of the Metropolitan Barracks, and younger sister of Lady Wang, the
wife of Jia Zheng of the Rong mansion. She was now around fifty and had only the
one son. Besides Xue Pan she had a daughter two years his junior called Bao-chai, a
girl of flawless looks and great natural refinement. While her father was still alive she
had been his favourite and had been taught to read and write and construe—all of
which she did ten times better than her oafish brother; but when he died and her
brother proved incapable of offering their mother any comfort, she laid aside her
books and devoted herself to needlework and housewifely duties in order to take
some of the burden off her mother’s shoulders.
The well-known interest always shown by our present sovereign in literature and the
arts, and the widespread re?cruitment of talent that this has stimulated, had recently,
at the time of which we speak, led to an unprecedented act of Imperial grace
whereby daughters of hereditary officials and distinguished families, apart from the
possibility of being recruited to the Imperial seraglio by the customary pro?cedures,
were permitted to have their names sent in to the Ministry for selection as
study-companions, with the rank and title of Maid of Honour or Lady-in-waiting, of
the Imperial princesses and the daughters of princes of the blood.
This circumstance, coupled with the fact that, since the death of his father, the
managers, clerks, and factors of the family business in its various agencies
throughout the pro?vinces had profited from Xue Pan’s youth and ignorance of affairs
to feather their own nests at the firm’s expense, and even the family’s enterprises in
the capital, of which there were several, had shown a gradual falling-off, provided
Xue Pan, who had long heard of the rich pleasures of the metropolis and was agog to
taste them, with excuses for realizing his cherished ambition, viz:
1.They must go to the capital because he had to present his sister to the Ministry for
selection.
2. They must go to the capital to look up their kinsfolk there.
3. They must go to the capital so that he might clear his accounts with the Ministry
and take receipt of a new install?ment of funds.
(Needless to say, the sole substantial reason for going to the capital, Xue Pan’s desire
to see the sights, was unexpressed.)
Accordingly, their baggage had long been packed and souvenirs of Nanking for their
friends and relations in the capital long been selected and a date for their departure
long been decided on, when Xue Pan encountered the kidnapper and Ying-lian and,
as Ying-lian was an uncommonly attractive slave-girl, resolved to purchase her and
make her his concu?bine.
Then Feng and his servants came to seize the girl and Xue Pan, confident in his
superior forces, shouted the command to his attendant roughs which was to have
such fatal con?sequences for poor Feng Yuan.
Entrusting everything to his clansmen and a few old and trusty retainers, he then
proceeded to depart according to schedule, in company with his mother and sister,
on the long journey to the capital, accounting the charge of manslaughter a mere
bagatelle which the expenditure of a certain amount of coin could confidently be
expected to resolve.
Of the journey our story gives no record, except to say that on the last day, when
they were about to enter the capital, they heard news that Xue Pan’s uncle Wang
Zi-teng had just been promoted C.-in-C. Northern Provinces with instructions to leave
the capital on a tour of frontier inspection. The news secretly delighted Xue Pan.
‘Just as I was worrying about Uncle cramping my style when we got to the capital
and preventing me from having a really good fling,’ he reflected, ‘the old boy
obligingly gets himself popped out of the way. Fortune is on my side!’
He then proceeded to reason as follows with his mother:
‘We’ve got several houses in the capital, but it’s all of ten years since anyone has
been to stay in them, so you can bet that the housekeepers will have let all the
rooms out on the sly. We shall have to send someone on ahead to get things
straightened out for us.’
‘Whyever should we go to any such trouble?’ said his mother. ‘I thought the main
purpose of our coming here in the first place was to see our relations. There must be
lots and lots of spare room at your Uncle Wang’s and at your Uncle Jia’s place. Surely
it would be much more sensible to stay with one of them first? There will be plenty
of time to send our people to get a place of our own ready after we are there.’
‘But Uncle’s just been promoted to the Northern Provinces,’ Xue Pan expostulated.
‘They will all be making frantic prepara?tions for him to go. What sort of stupid idiots
shall we look like if we come scooting along with all our bag and baggage just at the
very moment when he wants to leave?’
‘Suppose your Uncle Wang has been promoted to another place,’ said his mother.
‘There is still your Uncle Jia. Besides, Uncle Wang and Auntie Jia have for years been
sending us letters inviting us to come and stay with them. Now that we are here,
even though Uncle Wang is busy getting ready to go, Auntie Jia will probably be only
too glad to have us. I’m sure she would be most offended if we were to go rushing off
to get our own house ready.
‘But I know perfectly well what’s in your mind. You think that if we are staying with
your uncle or aunt you will be too restricted, and that if we were living in our own
place you would be freer to do just as you liked. Very well then. Why don’t you go off
and choose a house for yourself to live in and let me and your sister go to Auntie’s
without you? I haven’t seen her or the girls for years and years, and I intend to spend
a few days with them now we are here.’
Experience taught Xue Pan that his mother was in an obstinate mood and not to be
shaken from her purpose, so he resignedly gave orders to the porters to make
straight for the Rong mansion.



*



Lady Wang had just breathed a sigh of relief on learning that the affair of Xue Pan’s
manslaughter charge had been retrieved through the good offices of Jia Yu-cun,
when the news that her elder brother had been promoted to a frontier post plunged
her once more in gloom at the prospect of losing her main source of contact with the
members of her own family. Several days passed in despondency, and then suddenly
the servants announced that her sister, bringing her son and daughter and all her
household with her, had arrived in the capital and was at that very moment outside
the gate dismount?ing from her carriage.
Delightedly she hurried with her women to the entrance of the main reception hall
and conducted Aunt Xue and her party inside. The sudden reunion of the two sisters
was, it goes with?out saying, an affecting one in which joy and sorrow mingled. After
an exchange of information about the years of separa?tion, and after they had been
taken to see Grandmother Jia and made their reverence to her, and after the gifts of
Nanking produce had been presented and everyone had been introduced to
everyone else, there was a family party to welcome the new arrivals.
Xue Pan, meanwhile, had paid his respects to Jia Zheng and Jia Lian and been taken
to see Jia She and Cousin Zhen. Jia Zheng now sent a servant round to Lady Wang
with the follow?ing message:
‘Your sister is getting on in years and our nephew is very young and seems rather
inexperienced and, I fear, quite capable of getting into a scrape again if they are going
to live outside. Pear Tree Court in the north-east corner of our property is lying
completely unoccupied at the moment and has quite a sizeable amount of room in it.
Why not invite your sister and her children to move in there?’
Lady Wang had wanted all along to ask her sister to stay. Grandmother Jia had sent
someone round to tell her that she should ‘ask Mrs Xue to stay with us here, so that
we can all be close to one another.’ And Aunt Xue for her own part had been wanting
to stay so that some sort of check could be kept on her son. She was sure that if they
were to be on their own somewhere else in the city his unbridled nature would
precipitate some fresh calamity. She therefore accepted the in?vitation with alacrity,
privately adding the proviso that she could only contemplate a long stay if it was on
the understanding that they were themselves to be responsible for all their expenses.
Lady Wang knew that money was no problem to them, so she readily consented, and
Aunt Xue and her children proceeded there and then to move into Pear Tree Court.
This Pear Tree Court had been the Duke of Rong-guo’s retreat during the last years of
his life. Its buildings totalled not much more than ten frames; but though small and
charm?ing, it was complete in every respect, with a little reception room in the front
and all the usual rooms and offices behind. It had its own outer door on to the street,
through which Xue Pan and the menservants could come and go, and another gate in
the south-west corner giving on to a passage-way which led into the courtyard east
of Lady Wang’s compound.
Through this passage-way Aunt Xue would now daily repair, either after dinner or in
the evening, to gossip with Grandmother Jia or reminisce with her sister, Lady Wang.
Bao-chai for her part spent her time each day in great con?tentment, reading or
playing Go or sewing with Dai-yu and the three girls.
The only dissatisfied member of the party - to begin with, at any rate—was Xue Pan.
He had not wanted to stay in the Jia household, fearing that his uncle’s control would
prevent him from enjoying himself, but what with his mother’s obstinacy and the
insistence of the Jias themselves, he was obliged to acquiesce in settling there for the
time being, contenting himself with sending some of his people to clean up one of
their houses outside so that he would be able to move there later on.
But, to his pleasant surprise, he discovered that the young males of the Jia
establishment, half of whom he was already on familiar terms with before he had
been there a month, were of the same idle, extravagant persuasion as himself and
thought him a capital fellow and boon companion. And so he found himself meeting
them for a drinking-party one day, for theatre-going the next, on a third day perhaps
gambling with them or visiting brothels. For there were no limits to the depravity of
their pleasures, and Xue Pan, who was bad enough to start with, soon became ten
times worse under their expert guidance.
It was not that Jia Zheng was a slack disciplinarian, incapable of keeping his house in
order; but the clan was so numerous that he simply could not keep an eye on
everyone at once. And in any case the nominal head of the family was not Jia Zheng
but Cousin Zhen who, as eldest grandson of the senior, Ning-guo branch, had
inherited the founder’s office and emoluments and was therefore officially in charge
of all the clan’s affairs.
Besides, Jia Zheng was kept busy with public and private business of his own and,
being by nature a quiet, retiring man who attached little importance to mundane
affairs, tended to use whatever leisure time he had for reading and playing Go.
Then again, the Pear Tree Court was two courtyards away from Jia Zheng’s compound
and had its own private door onto the street by which Xue Pan could come and go as
he pleased, so that he and his young cronies could enjoy themselves to their heart’s
content with no one being any the wiser.
Under these agreeable Circumstances Xue Pan gradually abandoned all thought of
moving out.
But as to the outcome of these capers: that will be told in a later chapter.




CHAPTER 5

Jia Bao-yu visits the Land of Illusion
And the fairy Disenchantment performs the
‘Dream of Golden Days’
From the moment Lin Dai-yu entered the Rong mansion, Grandmother Jia’s solicitude
for her had manifested itself in a hundred different ways. The arrangements made for
her meals and accommodation were exactly the same as for Bao-yu. The other three
granddaughters, Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi?-chun, were relegated to a secondary
place in the old lady’s affections, and the objects of her partiality themselves began
to feel an affection for each other which far exceeded what they felt for any of the
rest. Sharing each other’s company every minute of the day and sleeping in the same
room at night, they developed an understanding so intense that it was almost as if
they had grown into a single person.
And now suddenly this Xue Bao-chai had appeared on the scene—a young lady who,
though very little older than Dai-yu, possessed a grown-up beauty and aplomb in
which all agreed Dai-yu was her inferior. Moreover, in contrast to Dai-yu with her alt
of lofty self-sufficiency and total obliviousness to all who did not move on the same
exalted level as herself, Bao-chai had a generous, accommodating disposition which
greatly endeared her to subordinates, so that even the tiniest maid looked on Miss
Bao-chai as a familiar friend. Dai-yu could not but feel somewhat put out by this—a
fact of which Bao-chai herself, however, was totally unaware.
As for Bao-yu, he was still only a child—a child, moreover, whom nature had
endowed with the eccentric obtuseness of a simpleton. Brothers, sisters, cousins,
were all one to him. In his relationships with people he made no distinction between
one person and another. If his relationship with Dai-yu was exceptional, it was
because greater proximity—since she was living with him in his grandmother’s
quarters—made her more familiar to him than the rest; and greater familiarity bred
greater intimacy.
And of course, with greater intimacy came the occasional tiffs and misunderstandings
that are usual with people who have a great deal to do with each other.
One day the two of them had fallen out over something or other and the argument
had ended with Dai-yu crying alone in her room and Bao-yu feeling remorsefully that
perhaps he had spoken too roughly. Presently he went in to make his peace with her
and gradually, very gradually, Dai-yu’s equani?mity was restored.
The Winter plum in the gardens of the Ning Mansion was now at its best, and this
particular day Cousin Zhen’s wife, You-shi, had some wine taken into the gardens and
came over in person, bringing her son Jia Rong and his young wife with her, to invite
Grandmother Jia, Lady Xing and Lady Wang to a flower-viewing party.
Grandmother Jia and the rest went round as soon as they had finished their breakfast.
The party was in the All-scents Garden. It began with tea and continued with Wine,
and as it was a family gathering confined to the ladies of the Ning and Rong
households, nothing particularly worth recording took place.
At one point in the party Bao-yu was overcome with tiredness and heaviness and
expressed a desire to take an afternoon nap. Grandmother Jia ordered some of the
servants to go back to the house with him and get him comfortably settled, adding
that they might return with him later when he was rested; but Qin-shi, the little wife
of Jia Rong, smilingly proposed an alternative.
‘We have got just the room here for Uncle Bao. Leave him to me, Grannie dear! He
will be quite safe in my hands.’
She turned to address the nurses and maidservants who were in attendance on
Bao-yu.
‘Come, my dears! Tell Uncle Bao to follow me.’
Grandmother Jia had always had a high opinion of Qin-shi’s trustworthiness—she
was such a charming, delightful little creature, the favourite among her
great-granddaughters-in-law—and was quite content to leave the arrangements to
her.
Qin-shi conducted Bao-yu and his little knot of attendants to an inner room in the
main building. As they entered, Bao-yu glanced up and saw a painting hanging above
them on the opposite wall. The figures in it were very finely executed. They
represented Scholarly Diligence in the person of the Han philosopher Liu Xiang at his
book, obligingly illuminated for him by a supernatural being holding a large flaming
torch. Bao-yu found the painting—or rather its subject—distasteful. But the pair of
mottoes which flanked it proved the last straw:
True learning implies a clear insight into human activities.
Genuine culture involves the skilful manipulation of human rela?tionships.
In vain the elegant beauty and splendid furnishings of the room! Qin-shi was given to
understand in no uncertain terms that her uncle Bao-yu wished to be out of it at
once.
‘If this is not good enough for you,’ said Qin-shi with a laugh, ‘where are we going
to put you? — unless you would like to have your rest in my bedroom.’
A little smile played over Bao-yu’s face and he nodded. The nurses were shocked.
‘An uncle sleep in the bedroom of his nephew’s wife! Who ever heard of such a
thing!’
Qin-shi laughed again.
‘He won’t misbehave. Good gracious, he’s only a little boy! We don’t have to worry
about that sort of thing yet! You know my little brother who came last month: he’s
the same age as Uncle Bao, but if you stood them side by side I shouldn’t be a bit
surprised if he wasn’t the taller of the two.’
‘Why haven’t I seen your brother yet?’ Bao-yu demanded. ‘Bring him in and let me
have a look at him!’
The servants all laughed.
‘Bring him in? Why, he’s ten or twenty miles away! But I expect you’ll meet him one
of these days.’
In the course of this exchange the party had made its way to Qin-shi’s bedroom. As
Bao-yu entered, a subtle whiff of the most delicious perfume assailed his nostrils,
making a sweet stickiness inside his drooping eyelids and causing all the joints in his
body to dissolve.
‘What a lovely smell!’
He repeated the words several times over.
Inside the room there was a painting by Tang Yin entitled ‘Spring Slumber’ depicting
a beautiful woman asleep under a crab-apple tree, whose buds had not yet opened.
The painting was flanked on either side by a pair of calligraphic scrolls inscribed with
a couplet from the brush of the Song poet Qin Guan:
(on one side)
The coldness of spring has imprisoned the soft buds in a wintry dream;
(on the other side)

The fragrance of wine has intoxicated the beholder with imagined flower-scents.

On a table stood an antique mirror that had once graced the tiring-room of the
lascivious empress Wu Ze-tian. Beside it stood the golden platter on which Flying
Swallow once danced for her emperor’s delight. And on the platter was that very
quince which the villainous An Lu-shan threw at beauti?ful Yang Gui-fei, bruising her
plump white breast. At the far end of the room stood the priceless bed on which
Princess Shou-yang was sleeping out of doors under the eaves of the Han-zhang
Palace when the plum-flower lighted on her fore?head and set a new fashion for
coloured patches. Over it hung a canopy commissioned by Princess Tong-chang
entirely fashioned out of ropes of pearls.
‘I like it here,’ said Bao-yu happily.
‘My room,’ said Qin-shi with a proud smile, ‘is lit for an immortal to sleep in.’ And
she unfolded a quilted coverlet, whose silk had been laundered by the fabulous Xi Shi,
and arranged the double head-rest that Hong-niang once carried for her amorous
mistress,
The nurses now helped Bao-yu into bed and then tiptoed out, leaving him attended
only by his four young maids: Aroma, Skybright, Musk, and Ripple. Qin-shi told them
to go outside and stop the cats from lighting on the eaves.
As soon as Bao-yu closed his eyes he sank into a confused sleep in which Qin-shi was
still there yet at the same time seemed to be drifting along weightlessly in front of
him. He followed her until they came to a place of marble terraces and vermilion
balustrades where there were green trees and crystal streams. Everything in this
place was so clean and so pure that it seemed as if no human foot could ever have
trodden there or floating speck of dust ever blown into it. Bao-yu’s dreaming self
rejoiced. ‘What a delightful place!’ he thought. ‘If only I could spend all my life here!
How much nicer it would be than living under the daily restraint of my parents and
teachers!’
These idle reflections were interrupted by someone singing a song on the other side
of a hill:
‘Spring’s dream-time will like drifting clouds disperse,
Its flowers snatched by a flood none can reverse.
Then tell each nymph and swain
‘Tis folly to invite love’s pain!’

It was the voice of a girl. Before its last echoes had died away, a beautiful woman
appeared in the quarter from which the voice had come, approaching him with a
floating, fluttering motion. She was quite unlike any earthly lady, as the following
poem will make clear:

She has left her willow-tree house, from her blossoming bower stepped out;
For the birds betray where she walks through the trees that cluster about,
And a shadow athwart the winding walk announces that she is near,
And a fragrance of musk and orchid from fluttering fairy sleeves,
And a tinkle of girdle-gems that falls on the ear
At each movement of her dress of lotus leaves.
A peach-tree blossoms in her dimpling cheek;
Her cloud-coiled tresses are halcyon-sleek;
And she reveals, through parted cherry lips,
Teeth like pomegranate pips.
Her slim waist’s sinuous swaying calls to mind
The dance of snowflakes with the waltzing wind;
Hair ornaments of pearl and halcyon blue
Outshine her painted forehead’s golden hue.
Her face, through blossoms fleetingly disclosed,
To mirth or ire seems equally disposed;
And as by the waterside she goes,
Hovering on light-stepping toes,
A half-incipient look of pique
Says she would speak, yet would not speak;
While her feet, with the same irresolution,
Would halt, yet would not interrupt their motion.
I contemplate her rate complexion,
Ice-pure and lade-like in perfection;
I marvel at her glittering dress,
Where art lends grace to sumptuousness;
I wonder at her fine-cut featured—
Marble, which fragrance marks as one with living creatures;
And I admire her queenly gait,
Like stately dance of simurgh with his mate.
Her purity I can best show
In plum-trees flowering in the snow;
Her chastity I shall recall
In orchids white at first frost-fall;
Her tranquil nature will prevail,
Constant as lone pine in an empty vale;
Her loveliness as dazzled make
As sunset gilding a pellucid lake;
Her glittering elegance I can compare
With dragons in an ornamental mere;
Her dreamy soulfulness most seems
Like wintry waters in the moon’s cold beams.
The beauties of days gone by by her beauty are all abashed.
Where was she born, and from whence descended?
Immortal I judge her, fresh come from fairy feastings by the Jasper Pool,
Or from fluting in starry balls, some heavenly concert ended.

Observing delightedly that the lady was a fairy, Bao-yu hurried forward and saluted
her with a smile.
‘Madam Fairy, I don’t know where you have come from or where you are going to,
but as I am quite lost in this place, will you please take me with you and be my
guide?’
‘I am the fairy Disenchantment,’ the fairy woman replied. ‘I live beyond the Realm
of Separation, in the Sea Of Sadness. There is a Mountain of Spring Awakening which
rises from the midst of that sea, and on that mountain is the Paradise of the
Full-blown Flower, and in that paradise is the Land of Illusion, which is my home. My
business is with the romantic passions, love-debts, girlish heartbreaks and male
philanderings of your dust-stained, human world. The reason I have come here today
is that recently there has been a heavy concen?tration of love-karma in this area, and
I hope to be able to find an opportunity of distributing a quantity of a amorous
thoughts by implanting them in the appropriate breasts. My meeting you here today
is no accident but a part of the same project.
‘This place where we are now is not so very far from my home. I have not much to
offer you, but would you like to come back with me and let me try to entertain you? I
have some fairy tea, which I picked myself. You could have a cup of that. And I have a
few jars of choice new wine of my own brewing. I have also been rehearsing a fairy
choir and a troupe of fairy dancers in a twelve-part suite which I recently com?posed
called “2222A Dream of Golden Days”. I could get them to perform it for you. What
do you think?’
Bao-yu was so excited by this invitation that he quite forgot to wonder what had
become of Qin-shi in his eagerness to accompany the fairy. As he followed her, a big
stone arch?way suddenly loomed up in front of them on which

THE LAND OF ILLUSION

was Written in large characters. A couplet in smaller characters was inscribed on
either side of the arch:

        Truth becomes fiction when the fiction’s true;
        Real becomes not-real when the unreal’s real.

Having negotiated the archway, they presently came to the gateway of a palace. The
following words were inscribed horizontally above the lintel:

SEAS OF PAIN AND SKIES OF PASSION

whilst the following words were inscribed vertically on the two sides:
         Ancient earth and sky
                Marvel that love’s passion should outlast all time.
                   Star-crossed men and maids
                Groan that love’s debts should be so hard to pay.


‘I see,’ said Bao-yu to himself. ‘I wonder what the meaning of “passion that outlasts
all time” can be. And what are “love’s debts”? From now on I must make an effort to
understand these things.’
He could not, of course, have known it, but merely by thinking this he had invited the
attentions of the demon Lust, and at that very moment a little of the demon’s evil
poison had entered Bao-yu’s body and lodged itself in the innermost recesses of his
heart.
Wholly unconscious of his mortal peril, Bao-yu continued to follow the fairy woman.
They passed through a second gateway, and Bao-yu saw a range of palace buildings
ahead of them on either hand. The entrance to each building had a board above it
proclaiming its name, and there were couplets on either side of the doorways.
Bao-yu did not have time to read all of the names, but he managed to make out a few,
viz:

DEPARTMENT OF FOND INFATUATION
DEPARTMENT OF CRUEL REJECTION
DEPARTMENT OF EARLY MORNING WEEPING
DEPARTMENT OP LATE NIGHT SOBBING
DEPARTMENT OF SPRING FEVER
DEPARTMENT OF AUTUMN GRIEF



‘Madam Fairy,’ said Bao-yu, whose interest had been whetted by what he had
managed to read, ‘couldn’t you take me inside these offices to have a look around?’
‘In these offices,’ said the fairy woman, ‘are kept registers in which are recorded the
past, present and future of girls from all over the world. It is not permitted that your
earthly eyes should look on things that are yet to come.’
Bao-yu was most unwilling to accept this answer, and begged and pleaded so
persistently that at last Disenchantment gave in.
‘Very well. You may make a very brief inspection of this office here.’
Delighted beyond measure, Bao-yu raised his head and read the notice above the
doorway:

DEPARTMENT OP THE ILL-FATED FAIR

The couplet inscribed vertically on either side of the doorway was as follows:

        Spring grieves and autumn sorrows were by yourselves provoked.
        Flower faces, moonlike beauty were to what end disclosed?

Bao-yu grasped enough of the meaning to be affected by its melancholy.
Passing inside, he saw a dozen or more large cupboards with paper strips pasted on
their doors on which were written the names of different provinces. He was careful
to look out for the one belonging to his own area and presently found one on which
the paper strip said ‘Jinling, Twelve Beauties of; Main Register’. Bao-yu asked
Disenchantment what this meant, and she explained that it was a register of the
twelve most out-standing girls of his home province.
‘People all say what a big place Jinling is,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Surely there should be more
than just twelve names? Why, even in my own home, if you count the servants, there
must be altogether several hundred girls.’
‘Certainly there area great many girls in the whole province,’ said Disenchantment
with a smile, ‘but only the most im?portant ones have been selected for recording in
this register. The registers in the cupboards on either side contain two other
selections from the same area. But of the host of ordinary girls outside those three
dozen we keep no records.’
Bao-yu glanced at the other two cupboards referred to by Disenchantment. One was
labelled ‘Jinling, Twelve Beauties of; Supplementary Register No.1’; the other was
labelled ‘Jinling, Twelve Beauties of; Supplementary Register No.2’. Stretching out his
hand he opened the door of the second one, took out Supplementary Register No.2,
which was like a large album, and opened it at the first page.
It was a picture, but not of a person or a view.⒈The whole page was covered with
dark ink washes representing storm-clouds or fog, followed on the next page by a
few lines of verse:

                 Seldom the moon shines in a cloudless sky,
                 And days of brightness all too soon pass by.
        A noble and aspiring mind
        In a base-born frame confined,
        Your charm and wit did only hatred gain,
        And in the end you were by slanders slain,
        Your gentle lord’s solicitude in vain.

Bao-yu could not make much sense of this, and turned to the next page. It was
another picture, this time of a bunch of fresh flowers and a worn-out mat, again
followed by a few limes of verse.

        What price your kindness and compliance,
                  1.See Appendix, p.527.
        Of sweetest flower the rich perfume?
        You chose the player fortune favoured,
        Unmindful of your master’s doom.

Bao-yu was even more mystified by this than by the first page, and laying the album
aside, opened the door of the cupboard marked ‘Supplementary Register No. I’ and
took out the album from that.
As in the previous album, the first page was a picture. It represented a branch of
cassia with a pool underneath. The water in the pool had dried up and the mud in
the bottom was dry and cracked. Growing from it was a withered and broken lotus
plant. The picture was followed by these lines:

        Your stem grew from a noble lotus root,
        Yet your life passed, poor flower, in low repute.
        The day two earths shall bear a single tree,
        Your soul must fly home to its own country.

Once more failing to make any sense of what he saw, Bao-yu picked up the Main
Register to look at. In this album the picture on the first page represented two dead
trees with a jade belt hanging in their branches and on the ground beneath them a
pile of snow in which a golden hairpin lay half-buried. This was followed by a
quatrain:

        One was a pattern of female virtue,
        One a wit who made other wits seem slow.
              The jade belt in the greenwood hangs,
              The gold pin is buried beneath the snow.
Still Bao-yu was unable to understand the meaning. He would have liked to ask, but
he knew that Disenchantment would be unwilling to divulge the secrets of her
immortal world. Yet though he could make no sense of the book, for some reason he
found himself unable this time to lay it down, and continued to look through it to the
end.
The picture that followed was of a bow with a citron hanging from it, followed by
what looked like the words of a song:

You shall, when twenty years in life’s hard school are done,
In pomegranate-time to palace halls ascend.
Though three springs never could with your first spring compare,
When hare meets tiger your great dream shall end.
Next was a picture of two people flying a kite. There was also a large expanse of sea
with a boat in it and a girl in the boat who had buried her face in her hands and
appeared to be crying. This was followed by a quatrain:

Blessed with a shrewd mind and a noble heart,
    Yet born in time of twilight and decay,
    In spring through tears at river’s bank you gaze,
    Borne by the wind a thousand miles away.
The next picture showed some scudding wisps of cloud and a stretch of running
water followed by these words:

        What shall avail you rank and riches,
        Orphaned while yet in swaddling bands you lay?
        Soon you must mourn your bright sun’s early setting.
        The Xiang flows and the Chu clouds sail away.

Next was a picture showing a beautiful jade which had fallen into the mud, followed
by words of judgement:

        For all your would-be spotlessness
        And vaunted otherworldliness,
        You that look down on common flesh and blood,
        Yourself impure, shall end up in the mud.

Next was a striking picture of a savage wolf pursuing a beautiful girl. He had just
seized her with his jaws and appeared to be about to eat her. Underneath it was
written:

         Paired with a brute like the wolf in the old fable,
         Who on his saviour turned when he was able,
         To cruelty not used, your gentle heart
         Shall, in a twelvemonth only, break apart.
After this was an old temple with a beautiful girl sitting all on her own inside it
reading a Buddhist sutra. The words said:

        When you see through the spring scene’s transient state,
        A nun’s black habit shall replace your own.
        Alas, that daughter of so great a house
        By Buddha’s altar lamp should sleep alone!

Next was an iceberg with a hen phoenix perched on the top of it, and these words:

    This phoenix in a bad time came;
    All praised her great ability.
    ‘Two’ makes my riddle with a man and tree:
    Returning south in tears she met calamity.

Next was a cottage in a deserted village inside which a beautiful girl sat spinning,
followed by these words:

    When power is lost, rank matters not a jot;
    When families fall, kinship must be forgot.
    Through a chance kindness to a country wife
    Deliverance came for your afflicted life.

This was followed by a picture of a vigorously growing orchid in a pot, beside which
stood a lady in full court dress. The words said:

    The plum-tree bore her fruit after the rest,
    Yet, when all’s done, her Orchid was the best.
    Against your ice-pure nature all in vain
    The tongues of envy wagged; you felt no pain.

The picture after that showed an upper room in a tail build?ing in which a beautiful
girl was hanging by her neck from a beam, having apparently taken her own life. The
words said:

    Love was her sea, her sky; in such excess
    Love, meeting with its like, breeds wantonness.
    Say not our troubles all from Rong’s side came;
    For their beginning Ning must take the blame.

Bao-yu would have liked to see some more, but the fairy woman, knowing how
intelligent and sharp-witted he was, began to fear that she was in danger of
becoming responsible for a leakage of celestial secrets, and so, snapping the album
shut, she said with a laugh, ‘Come with me and we will do some more sight-seeing.
Why stay here puzzling your head over these silly riddles?’
Next moment, without quite knowing how it happened, Bao-yu found that he had
left the place of registers behind him and was following Disenchantment through the
rear parts of the palace. Everywhere there were buildings with ornately carved and
painted eaves and rafters, their doorways curtained with strings of pearls and their
interiors draped with em?broidered hangings. The courtyards outside them were full
of deliciously fragrant fairy blooms and rare aromatic herbs.

        Gleam of gold pavement flashed on scarlet doors,
        And in jade walls jewelled casements snow white shone.


‘ Hurry, hurry! Come out and welcome the honoured guest!’ he heard
Disenchantment calling to someone inside, and almost at once a bevy of fairy
maidens came running from the palace, lotus-sleeves fluttering and feather-skirts
billowing, each as enchantingly beautiful as the flowers of spring or the autumn
moon. Seeing Bao-yu, they began to reproach Dis?enchantment angrily.
‘So this is your “honoured guest”! What do you mean by making us hurry out to
meet him? You told us that today at this very hour the dream-soul of our darling
Crimson Pearl was coming to play with us, and we have been waiting I don’t know
how long for her arrival. And now, instead, you have brought this disgusting creature
to pollute our pure, maidenly precincts. What’s the idea ?’
At these words Bao-yu was suddenly overwhelmed with a sense of the uncleanness
and impurity of his own body and sought in vain for somewhere to escape to; but
Disenchant?ment held him by the hand and advanced towards the fairy maidens
with a conciliatory smile.
‘Let me tell you the reason for my change of plan. It is true that I set off for the
Rong mansion with the intention of fetch?ing Crimson Pearl, but as I was passing
through the Ning mansion on my way, I happened to run into the Duke of Ning?-guo
and his brother the Duke of Rong-guo and they laid a solemn charge on me which I
found it hard to refuse.
‘“In the hundred years since the foundation of the present dynasty,” they said,
“several generations of our house have distinguished themselves by their services to
the Throne and have covered themselves with riches and honours; but now its stock
of good fortune has run out, and nothing can be done to replenish it. And though our
descendants are many, not one of them is worthy to carry on the line. The only
possible exception, our great-grandson Bao-yu, has inherited a perverse, intractable
nature and is eccentric and emotionally unstable; and although his natural brightness
and intelligence augur well, we fear that owing to the fated eclipse of our family’s
fortunes there will be no one at hand to give the lad proper guidance and to start
him off along the right lines.
‘“May we profit from the fortunate accident of this en?counter, Madam, to entreat
you to take the boy in hand for us? Could you perhaps initiate him in the pleasures of
the flesh and all that sort of thing in such a way as to shock the silli?ness out of him?
In that way he might stand a chance of escaping some of the traps that people fall
into and be able to devote himself single-mindedly to the serious things of life. It
would be such a kindness if you would do this for us.”
‘Hearing the old gentlemen so earnest in their entreaty, I was moved to compassion
and agreed to bring the boy here. I began by letting him have a good look at the
records of the three grades of girls belonging to his own household; but the
experience did not bring any awareness; and so I have brought him to this place for
another attempt. It is my hope that a full exposure to the illusions of feasting,
drinking, music and dancing may succeed in bringing about an awakening in him
some time in the future.’
Having concluded her explanation, she led Bao-yu indoors. At once he became aware
of a faint, subtle scent, the source of which he was quite unable to identify and about
which he felt impelled to question Disenchantment.
‘ How could you possibly know what it was,’ said Dis?enchantment with a
somewhat scornful smile, ‘since this per?fume is not to be found anywhere in your
mortal world? It is made from the essences of rare plants found on famous
mountains and other places of great natural beauty, culled when they are new-grown
and blended with gums from the pearl-laden trees that grow in the jewelled groves
of paradise. It is called “Belles Se Fanent”.’
Bao-yu expressed his admiration.
The company now seated themselves, and some little maids served them with tea.
Bao-yu found its fragrance fresh and clean and its flavour delicious, totally unlike
those of any earthly blend he knew. He asked Disenchantment for the name.
‘The leaves are picked in the Paradise of the Full-blown Flower on the Mountain of
Spring Awakening,’ Disenchant?ment informed him. ‘It is infused in water collected
from the dew that lies on fairy flowers and leaves. The name is “Maiden’s Tears”.’
Bao-yu nodded attentively and commended the tea.
Looking around the room he noticed various musical instruments, antique bronzes,
paintings by old masters, poems by new poets, and other hallmarks of gracious living.
He was particularly delighted to observe some rouge-stained pieces of cotton-wool
lying on the indow-sill—evidently the after?math of some fairy-woman’s toilet. A pair
of calligraphic scrolls hung on the wall, making up the following couplet:
    Earth’s choicest spirits in the dark lie hid:
    Heaven ineluctably enforced their fate.

After reading the scrolls, Bao-yu asked to be introduced to the fairy maidens. They
had a strange assortment of names. One was called Dream-of-bliss, another was
called Loving-heart, a third Ask-for-trouble, a fourth Past-regrets, and the rest all had
names that were equally bizarre.
Presently the little maids came in again and proceeded to arrange some chairs
around a table and to lay it with food and wine for a feast. In the words of the poet,
Celestial nectar filled the crystal cup,
And liquid gold in amber goblets glowed.
The wine’s bouquet was delectable, and once again Bao-yu could not resist asking
about it.
‘This wine,’ said Disenchantment, ‘is made from the petals of hundreds of different
kinds of flowers and extracts from thousands of different sorts of trees. These are
blended and fermented with kylin’s marrow and phoenix milk. Hence its name,
“Lachrymae Rerum”’
Bao-yu praised it enthusiastically.
As they sat drinking wine, a troupe of twelve dancers entered and inquired what
pieces they should perform for the company’s entertainment.
‘You can do the twelve songs of my new song-and-dance suite “A Dream of Golden
Days”,’ said Disenchantment.
At once the sandalwood clappers began, very softly, to beat out a rhythm,
accompanied by the sedate twang of the Zheng’s silver strings and by the voice of a
singer.

    ‘When first the world from chaos rose…’

The singer had got no further than the first line of the first song when
Disenchantment interrupted.
‘This suite,’ she told Bao-yu, ‘is not like the music-dramas of your earthly
composers in which there are always the fixed parts of sheng, dan, jing, mo and so on,
and set tunes in the various Northern and Southern modes. In my suite each song is
an elegy on a single person or event and the tunes are original compositions which
we have orchestrated ourselves. You need to know what the songs are about in order
to appreciate them properly. I should not imagine you are very familiar with this sort
of entertainment; so unless you read the libretto of the songs first before listening to
them, I fear you may find them rather insipid.’
Turning to one of the maids, she ordered her to fetch the manuscript of her libretto
of ‘A Dream of Golden Days’ and gave it to Bao-yu to read, so that he could listen to
the songs with one eye on the text. These were the words in Dis?enchantment’s
manuscript:

    Prelude: A Dream of Go/den Days2

     When first the world from chaos rose,
     Tell me, how did love begin?
     The wind and moonlight first did love compose.
Now woebegone
And quite cast down
In low estate
I would my foolish heart expose,
And so perform
     This Dream of Golden Days,
And all my grief for my lost loves disclose.

First Song: The Mistaken Marriage

Let others all
Commend the marriage rites of gold and jade;
I still recall
The bond of old by stone and flower made;
And while my vacant eyes behold
Crystalline snows of beauty pure and cold,
From my mind can not be banished
That fairy wood forlorn that from the world has vanished.
How true I find
That every good some imperfection bolds!
Even a wife so courteous and so kind
No comfort’ brings to my afflicted mind.

2. See Appedix p.528.
Second Song: Hope Betrayed

One was a flower from paradise,
One a pure jade without spot or stain.
If each for the other one was not intended,
Then why in this life did they meet again?
And yet if fate bad meant them for each other,
Why was their earthly meeting all in vain?
In vain were all her sighs and tears,
In vain were all his anxious fears:
All, insubstantial, doomed to pass,
As moonlight mirrored in the water
Or flowers reflected in a glass.
Row many tears from those poor eyes could flow,
Which every season rained upon her woe?

                       Third Song: Mutability,
In the full flower of her prosperity
Once more came mortal mutability,
Bidding her, with both eyes wide,
All earthly things to cast aside,
And her sweet soul upon the airs to glide.
So far the road back home did seem
     That to her parents in a dream
     Thus she her final duty paid:
     ‘I that now am but a shade,
     Parents dear,
     For your happiness I fear:
    Do not tempt the hand of fate!
    Draw back, draw back, before it is too late!’

  Fourth Song: From Dear Ones Parted

     Sail, boat, a thousand miles through rain and wind,
     Leaving my home and dear ones far behind.
     I fear that my remaining years
     Will waste away in homesick tears.
     Father dear and mother mild,
     Be not troubled for your child!
     From of old our rising, falling
     Was ordained; so now this parting.
       Each in another land must be;
      Each for himself must fend as best he may;
      Now I am gone, oh. do not weep for me!

Fifth Song: Grief Amidst Gladness

While you still in cradle lay,
Both your parents passed away
Though born to silken luxury,
No warmth or kind indulgence came your way.
Yet yours was a generous, open-hearted nature,
And never could be snared or soured
By childish piques and envious passions—
You were a crystal house by wind and moonlight scoured.
Matched to a perfect, gentle husband,
Security of bliss at last it seemed,
And all your childish miseries redeemed.
But soon alas! the clouds of Gao-tang faded,
The waters of the Xiang ran dry.
In our grey world so are things always ordered:
What then avails it to lament and sigh?



Sixth Song: All at Odds

Heaven made you like a flower,
With grace and wit to match the gods,
Adding a strange, contrary nature
That set you with the test at odds.
Nauseous to you the world’s rank diet,
Vulgar its fashion’s gaudy dress:
But the world envies the superior
And hates a too precious daintiness.
Sad it seemed that your life should in dim-lit shrines be wasted,
All the sweets of spring untasted:
Yet, at the last,
Down into mud and shame your hopes were cast,
Like a white, flawless jade dropped in the muck,
Where only wealthy rakes might bless their luck.
Seventh Song: Husband and Enemy

    Zhong-shan wolf,
    Inhuman sot,
    Who for past kindnesses cared not a jot!
    Bully and spendthrift, reckless in debauch,
    For riot or for whoring always hot!
    A delicate young wife of gentle stock
    To you was no more than a lifeless block,
    And bore, when you would rant and rave,
    Treatment fat worse than any slave;
    So that her delicate, sweet soul
    In just a twelvemonth from its body stole.



Eighth Song: The Vanity of Spring

     When triple spring as vanity was seen,
     What use the blushing flowers, the willows green?
     From youth’s extravagance you sought release
     To win chaste quietness and heavenly peace.
     The hymeneal peach-blooms in the sky,
     The flowering almond’s blossoms seen on high
     Dismiss, since none, for sure,
     Can autumn’s blighting frost endure.
     Amidst sad aspens mourners sob and sigh,
     In maple woods the poor ghosts thinly cry,
          And under the dead grasslands lost graves lie.
         Now poor, now rich, men’s lives in toil are passed
         To be, like summer’s pride, cut down at last.
         The doors of life and death all must go through.
         Yet this I know is true:
         In Paradise there grows a precious tree
         Which bears the fruit of immortality.

Ninth Song: Caught By Her Own Cunning
           Too shrewd by half, with such finesse you wrought
           That your own life in your own toils was caught;
           But long before you died your heart was slain,
           And when you died your spirit walked in vain.
    Fall’n the great house once so secure in wealth,
           Each scattered member shifting for himself;
           And half a life-time’s anxious schemes
           Proved no more than the stuff of dreams.
           Like a great building’s tottering crash,
           Like flickering lampwick burned to ash,
           Your scene of happiness concludes in grief:
           For worldly bliss is always insecure and brief.

Tenth Song: The Survivor

            Some good remained,
            Some good remained:
The daughter found a friend in need
            Through her mother’s one good deed.
So let all men the poor and meek sustain,
            And from the example of her cruel kin refrain,
            Who kinship scorned and only thought of gain.
For far above the constellations
            One watches all and makes just calculations.

Eleventh Song: Splendour Come Late

            Favour, a shadow in the glass;
            Fame, a dream that soon would pass:
The blissful flowering-time of youth soon fled,
            Soon, too, the pleasures of the bridal bed.
A pearl-encrusted crown and robes of state
            Could not for death untimely compensate;
And though each man desires
Old age from want made free,
True blessedness requires
A clutch of young heirs at the knee.
Proudly upright
The head with cap and hands of office on,
And gleaming bright
Upon his breast the gold insignia shone.
An awesome sight
To see him so exalted stand! –
Yet the black night
Of death’s dark frontier lay close at hand.
All those whom history calls great
Left only empty names for us to venerate.

Twelfth Song: The Good Things Have An End

Perfumed was the dust that fell
From painted beams where springtime ended.
Her sportive heart
And amorous looks
The ruin of a mighty house portended.
The weakness in the line began with Jing;
The blame for the decline lay first in Ning;
But retribution all was of Love’s fashioning.

Epilogue: The Birds Into The Wood Have Flown

The office jack’s career is blighted,
    The rich man’s fortune now all vanished,
    The kind with life have been requited,
    The cruel exemplarily punished;
    The one who owed a life is dead,
    The tears one owed have all been shed.
    Wrongs suffered have the wrongs done expiated;
    The couplings and the sunderings were fated.
    Untimely death sin in some past life shows,
    But only luck a blest old age bestows.
    The disillusioned to their convents fly,
    The still deluded miserably die.
    Like birds who, having fed, to the woods repair,
    They leave the landscape desolate and bare.
Having reached the end of this suite, the singers showed signs of embarking on
another one. Disenchantment observed with a sigh that Bao-yu was dreadfully
bored.
‘Silly boy! You still don’t understand, do you?,
Bao-yu hurriedly stopped the girls and told them that they need not sing any more.
He felt dizzy and his head was spin?ning. He explained to Disenchantment that he
had drunk too much and would like to lie down.
At once she ordered the remains of the feast to be removed and conducted Bao-yu
to a dainty bedroom. The furnishings and hangings of the bed were more sumptuous
and beautiful than anything he had ever seen. To his intense surprise there was a
fairy girl sitting in the middle of it. Her rose-fresh beauty reminded him strongly of
Bao-chai, but there was also something about her of Dai-yu’s delicate charm. As he
was pondering the meaning of this apparition, he suddenly became aware that
Disenchantment was addressing him.
‘In the rich and noble households of your mortal world, too many of those bowers
and boudoirs where innocent tenderness and sweet girlish fantasy should reign are
injuriously defiled by coarse young voluptuaries and loose, wanton girls. And what is
even more detestable, there are always any number of worthless philanderers to
protest that it is woman’s beauty alone that inspires them, or loving feelings alone,
unsullied by any taint of lust. They lie in their teeth! To be moved by woman’s beauty
is itself a kind of lust. To experience loving feelings is, even more assuredly, a kind of
lust. Every act of love, every carnal congress of the sexes is brought about precisely
because sensual delight in beauty has kindled the feeling of love.
‘The reason I like you so much is because you are full of lust. You are the most
lustful person I have ever known in the whole world 1’
Bao-yu was scared by the vehemence of her words.
‘Madam Fairy, you are wrong! Because I am lazy over my lessons, Mother and
Father still have to scold me quite often; but surely that doesn’t make me lustful? I’m
still too young to know what they do, the people they use that word about.’
‘Ah, but you are lustful!’ said Disenchantment. ‘In principle, of course, all lust is the
same. But the word has many different meanings. For example, the typically lustful
man in the common sense of the word is a man who likes a pretty face, who is fond
of singing and dancing, who is inordinately given to flirtation; one who makes love in
season and out of season, and who, if he could, would like to have every pretty girl in
the world at his disposal, to gratify his desires whenever he felt like it. Such a person
is a mere brute. His is a shallow, promiscuous kind of lust.
‘But your kind of lust is different. That blind, defenceless love with which nature
has filled your being is what we call here “lust of the mind”. “Lust of the mind”
cannot be ex?plained in words, nor, if it could, would you be able to grasp their
meaning. Either you know what it means or you don’t.
‘Because of this “lust of the mind” women will find you a kind and understanding
friend; but in the eyes of the world I am afraid it is going to make you seem
unpractical and eccentric. It is going to earn you the jeers of many and the angry
looks of many more.
‘Today I received a most touching request on your behalf from your ancestors the
Duke of Ning-guo and the Duke of Rong-guo. And as I cannot bear the idea of your
being rejected by the world for the greater glory of us women, I have brought you
here. I have made you drunk with fairy wine. I have drenched you with fairy tea. I
have admonished you with fairy songs. And now I am going to give you my little sister
Two-in-one—”Ke-qing” to her friends—to be your bride.
‘The time is propitious. You may consummate the marriage this very night. My
motive in arranging this is to help you grasp the fact that, ‘since even in these
immortal precincts love is an illusion, the love of your dust-stained, mortal world
must be doubly an illusion. It is my earnest hope that, knowing this, you will
henceforth be able to shake yourself free of its en?tanglements and change your
previous way of thinking, devoting your mind seriously to the teachings of Confucius
and Mencius and your person wholeheartedly to the better?ment of society.’
Disenchantment then proceeded to give him secret instruc?tions in the art of love;
then, pushing him gently inside the room, she closed the door after him and went
away.
Dazed and confused, Bao-yu nevertheless proceeded to follow out the instructions
that Disenchantment had given him, which led him by predictable stages to that act
which boys and girls perform together—and which it is not my inten?tion to give a
full account of here.
Next morning he lay for a long time locked in blissful tenderness with Ke-qing,
murmuring sweet endearments in her ear and unable to tear himself away from her.
Eventually they emerged from the bedroom hand in hand to walk together
out-of-doors.
Their walk seemed to take them quite suddenly to a place where only thorn-trees
grew and wolves and tigers prowled around in pairs. Ahead of them the road ended
at the edge of a dark ravine. No bridge connected it with the other side. As they
hesitated, wondering what to do, they suddenly became aware that Disenchantment
was running up behind them.
‘Stop! Stop!’ she was shouting. ‘Turn back at once! Turn back!’
Bao-yu stood still in alarm and asked her what place this was.
‘This is the Ford of Error,’ said Disenchantment. ‘It is ten thousand fathoms deep
and extends hundreds of miles in either direction. No boat can ever cross it; only a
raft manned by a lay-brother called Numb and an acolyte called Dumb. Numb holds
the steering-paddle and Dumb wields the pole. They won’t ferry anyone across for
money, but only take those who are fated to cross over.
‘If you had gone on walking just now and had fallen in, all the good advice I was at
such pains to give you would have been wasted!’
Even as she spoke there was a rumbling like thunder from inside the abyss and a
multitude of demons and water monsters reached up and clutched at Bao-yu to drag
him down into its depths. In his terror the sweat broke out over his body like rain and
a great cry burst from his lips, ‘Ke-qing! Save me!’
    Aroma and his other maids rushed upstairs in alarm and clung to him.
Don’t be frightened, Bao-yu! We are here!’
But Qin-shi, who was out in the courtyard telling the maids to be sure that the cats
and dogs didn’t fight, marvelled to hear him call her name out in his sleep.
‘“Ke-qing” was the name they called me back at home when I was a little girl.
Nobody here knows it. I wonder how he could have found it out?’
If you have not yet fathomed the answer to her question, you must read the next
chapter.




CHAPTER 6

Jia Bao-yu conducts his first experiment
in the Art of Love
And Grannie Liu makes her first entry into the
Rong-guo mansion
Qin-shi was surprised to hear Bao-yu call out her childhood name in his sleep, but did
not like to pursue the matter. As she stood wondering, Bao-yu, who was still
bemused after his dream and not yet in full possession of his faculties, got out of bed
and began to stretch himself and to adjust his clothes, assisted by Aroma. As she was
doing up his trousers, her hand, chancing to stray over his thigh, came into contact
with some-thing cold and sticky which caused her to draw it back in alarm and ask
him if he was all right. Instead of answering, he merely reddened and gave the hand
a squeeze.
      Aroma had always been an intelligent girl. She was, in any case, a year or two
older than Bao-yu and had recently begun to have some understanding of the facts
of life. Observing the condition that Bao-yu was in, she therefore had more than an
inkling of what had happened. Abandoning her question, she busied herself with his
clothes, her cheeks suffused by a crimson blush of embarrassment. When he was
properly dressed, they went to rejoin Grandmother Jia and the rest. There they
bolted a hurried supper and then slipped back to the other house, where Aroma
profited from the absence of the nurses and the other maids to take out a clean
under?garment for Bao-yu to change into.
      ‘Please, Aroma,’ Bao-yu shamefacedly entreated as she helped him change,
‘please don’t tell anyone !’
Equally ill at ease, Aroma giggled softly.
‘Why did you... ?’ she began to ask. Then, after glancing cautiously around, began
again.
‘Where did that stuff come from?’
     Bao-yu blushed furiously and said nothing. Aroma stared at him curiously and
continued to giggle. After much hesitation he proceeded to give her a detailed
account of his dream. But when he came to the part of it in which he made love to
Two-in-one, Aroma threw herself forward with a shriek of laughter and buried her
face in her hands.
     Bao-yu had long been attracted by Aroma’s somewhat coquettish charms and
tugged at her purposefully, anxious to share with her the lesson he had learned from
Disenchant?ment. Aroma knew that when Grandmother Jia gave her to Bao-yu she
had intended her to belong to him in the fullest possible sense, and so, having no
good reason for refusing him, she allowed him, after a certain amount of coy
resistance, to have his way with her.
    From then on Bao-yu treated Aroma with even greater consideration than before,
whilst Aroma for her part re?doubled the devotion with which she served him. But of
this, for the time being, no more.
*

The inhabitants of the Rong mansion, if we include all of them from the highest to
the humblest in our total, numbered more than three hundred souls, who produced
between them a dozen or more incidents in a single day. Faced with so ex?uberant an
abundance of material, what principle should your chronicler adopt to guide him in
his selection of incidents to record? As we pondered the problem where to begin, it
was suddenly solved for us by the appearance as it were out of nowhere of someone
from a very humble, very insignificant household who, on the strength of a very
tenuous, very remote family connection with the Jias, turned up at the Rong mansion
on the very day of which we are about to write.
     Their name was Wang and they were natives of these parts. A grandfather had
held some very small official post in the capital and had there become acquainted
with Wang Xi-feng’s grandfather, the father of Lady Wang. Conceiving an ad?miration
for the power and prestige of this greater namesake, he had sought to link his family
with the latter’s clan by becoming his adoptive nephew. Only Lady Wang and her
elder brother—Wang Xi-feng’s father—who chanced at that time to be staying with
their parent on his tour of duty at the capital, knew anything about this. The other
members of the clan were unaware that any such relationship existed.
The grandfather had long since died, leaving an only son called Wang Cheng who,
having fallen on hard times, had moved back into the countryside somewhere
outside the capital. Wang Cheng in his turn had died leaving a son called Gou-er, who
had married a girl from a family called Liu and now had two children, a son called
Ban-er and a daughter called Qing-er. The four of them depended on agriculture for
their living, and since, with Gou-er himself busy most of the day on the land and his
wife busy about the farm drawing water, pounding grain, and the like, there was no
one to look after Qing-er and her little brother, Gou-er invited his mother-?in-law, old
Grannie Liu, to come and live with them.
This Grannie Liu was an ancient widow-woman, rich in experience of the world, who,
having no son or daughter-in-law to cherish her, eked out her solitary existence by
scratching a livelihood from a miserable half-acre of land. She therefore embraced
her son-in-law’s invitation with alacrity and threw herself enthusiastically into the
business of helping the young couple to make a living.
The season was now at the turn between autumn and winter. The cold weather was
beginning, but none of the preparations for winter had yet been made. By drinking to
allay his anxiety, Gou-er merely put himself more out of temper. He returned home
to vent some of his spleen on his long-suffering wife. Grannie Liu could eventually
stomach no more of his wife-baiting and intervened on her daughter’s behalf.
‘Now look here, son-in-law: probably you will think me an interfering old woman;
but we country folk have to be grate?ful for what is in the pot and cut down our
appetites to the same measure. When you were little your Ma and Pa could afford to
indulge you; so now you’re grown-up you spend all your money as soon as you’ve got
any, without stopping to count the cost; then, when it’s all gone, you start making a
fuss. But what sort of way is that for a grown man to behave?
‘Now where we live may be out in the country, but it’s still “in the Emperor’s
shadow”, as they say. Over there in the city the streets are paved with money just
waiting for someone to go and pick it up. What’s the sense in rampaging around here
at home when you could go out and help your?self?’
‘It’s easy for you to sit on your backside and talk,’ said Gou-er rudely, ‘but what do
you expect me to do? Go out and rob?’
‘No one’s asking you to rob,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘But can’t we all sit down peaceably
and think of a way? Because if we don’t, the money isn’t going to come walking in
the door of its own accord.’
Gou-er snorted sarcastically. ‘If there were a way, do you suppose I should have
waited till now before trying it out? There are no tax-collectors in my family and no
mandarins among my friends. What way could there be of laying my hands on some
money? Even if I did have rich friends or relations, I’m not so sure they would want to
be bothered with the likes of us.’
‘I wouldn’t say that,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘Man proposes, God disposes. It’s up to us to
think of something. We must leave it to the good Lord to decide whether He’ll help
us or not. Who knows, He might give us the opportunity we are looking for.
‘Now I can think of a chance you might try. Your family used to be connected with
the Wang clan of Nanking. Twenty years ago the Nanking Wangs used to be very
good to you folk. It’s only because of late years you have been too stiff-necked to
approach them that they have become more distant with you.
‘I can remember going to their house once with my daughter. The elder Miss Wang
was a very straightforward young lady, very easy to get on with, and not at all high
and mighty. She’s now the wife of the younger of the two Sir Jias in the Rong
mansion. They say that now she’s getting on in years she’s grown even more
charitable and given to good works than she was as a girl. Her brother has been
promoted; but I shouldn’t be surprised if she at least didn’t still remember us. Why
don’t you try your luck with her? You never know, she might do something for you
for the sake of old times. She only has to feel well disposed and a hair off her arm
would be thicker than a man’s waist to poor folks like us’,
     ‘That’s all very well, Mother,’ put in Gou-er’s wife, ‘but just take a look at us!
What sort of state are we in to go calling on great folks like them? I doubt the people
at the door would bother to tell them we were there. Who’s going to all that trouble
just to make a fool of themselves?’
     Gou-er’s cupidity, however, had been aroused by the words of his mother-in-law,
and his reaction to them was less dis?couraging than his wife’s.
     ‘Well, if it’s as you say, Grannie, and being as you’ve al?ready seen this lady, why
not go there yourself and spy out the land for us?’
     ‘Bless us and save us!’ said Grannie Lin. ‘You know what they say: “A prince’s
door is like the deep sea.” What sort of creature do you take me for? The servants
there don’t know me; it would be a journey wasted.’
     ‘That’s no problem,’ said Gou-er. ‘I’ll tell you what to do. You take young Ban-er
with you and ask for Old Zhou that stayed in service with your lady after she married.
If you tell them you’ve come to see him, it will give you an excuse for the visit Old
Zhou once entrusted a bit of business to my father. He used to be very friendly with
us at one time.’
     ‘I knew all about that,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘But it’s a long time since you had
anything to do with him and hard to say how he may prove after all these years.
Howsomever. Being a man, you naturally can’t go in your present pickle; and a young
married woman like my daughter can’t go gallivanting around the countryside
showing herself to everybody. But as my old face is tough enough to stand a slap or
two, it’s up to me to go. So be it, then. If any good does come of the visit, we shall all
of us benefit.’
     And so, that very evening, the matter was settled.
     Next day Grannie Liu was up before dawn. As soon as she had washed and done
her hair, she set about teaching Ban-er a few words to say to the ladies at the great
house—an exercise to which he submitted cheerfully enough, as would any little boy
of four or five who had been promised an outing to the great city. That done, she set
off on her journey, and in due course made her way to Two Dukes Street. There, at
each side of the stone lions which flanked the gates of the Rong Mansion, she saw a
cluster of horses and palanquins. Not daring to go straight up, she first dusted down
her clothes and rehearsed Ban-er’s little repertoire of phrases before sidling up to
one of the side entrances.
A number of important-looking gentlemen sat in the gate?way sunning their bellies
and discoursing with animated gestures on a wide variety of topics. Grannie Liu
waddled up to them and offered a respectful salutation. After looking her up and
down for a moment or two, they asked her her business. Grannie Liu smiled
ingratiatingly.
     ‘I’ve come to see Old Zhou that used to be in service with Her Ladyship before
she married. Could I trouble one of you gentlemen to fetch him out for me?’
The gentlemen ignored her request and returned to their discussion. After she had
waited there for some considerable time one of them said, ‘If you stand at that gate
along there on the corner, someone from inside the house should be coming out
presently.’
But a more elderly man among them protested that it was ‘a shame to send her on a
fool’s errand’, and turning to Grannie Liu he said, ‘Old Zhou is away in the South at
the moment, but his missus is still at home. She lives round at the back. You’ll have to
go from here round to the back gate in the other street and ask for her there.’
     Grannie Liu thanked him and trotted off with little Ban-er all the way round to
the rear entrance. There she found a number of sweetmeat vendors and toy-sellers
who had set their wares down outside the gate and were being besieged by a crowd
of some twenty or thirty noisy, yelling children. She grabbed a small urchin from their
midst and drew him towards her.
     ‘Tell me, sonny, is there a Mrs Zhou living here?’
     The urchin stared back at her impudently.
     ‘Which Mrs Zhou? There are several Mrs Zhous here. What’s her job?’
‘She’s the Mrs Zhou that came here with Her Ladyship when she was married.’
‘That’s easy,’ said the urchin. ‘Follow me!’
He led Grannie Lin into a rear courtyard. ‘That’s where she lives,’ he said, pointing
in the direction of a side wall. Then, bawling over the wall, ‘Mrs Zhou, there’s an
old woman come to see you！’
Zhou Rui’s wife came hurrying out and asked who it was.
‘How are you, my dear?’ said Grannie Liu, advancing with a smile. Zhou Rui’s wife
scrutinized her questioningly for some moments before finally recognizing her.
‘Why, it’s Grannie Liu! How are you? It’s so many years since I saw you last, I’d
forgotten all about you! Come in and sit down!’
Grannie Liu followed her cackling.
‘You know what they say: “Important people have short memories.” I wouldn’t
expect you to remember the likes of us!’
When they were indoors, Zhou Rui’s wife ordered her little hired help to pour out
some tea.
‘And hasn’t Ban-er grown a big boy!’ said Zhou Rui’s wife; then, after a few
inquiries about the various things that had happened since they last met, she asked
Grannie Liu about her visit.
‘Were you just passing by, or have you come specially?’
‘Well, of course, first and foremost we came to see you, replied Grannie Liu
mendaciously, ‘but we were also hoping to pay our respects to Her Ladyship. If you
could take us to see her, that would be very nice; but if that’s not possible, perhaps
we could trouble you just to give her our regards.’
From the tone of this reply Zhou Rui’s wife was already able to make a pretty good
guess as to the real purpose of the old woman’s visit; but because some years
previously her husband had received a lot of help from Gou-er’s father in a dispute
over the purchase of some land, she could not very well reject Grannie Iiu now, when
she came to her as a suppliant. She was, in any case, anxious to demonstrate her own
importance in the Jia household; and so the answer she gave her was a gracious one.
‘Don’t you worry, Grannie! After you’ve made such a long pilgrimage, we won’t let
you go home without seeing a real Buddha! By rights, of course, Callers and Visitors
has nothing to do with me. You see, we each have our own jobs here. My man’s is
collecting the half-yearly rents in the spring and autumn; and when he’s not doing
that, he takes the young masters out when they go on visits. That’s all he ever does.
Now my job is to attend to their ladyships and the young mistresses when they go
out. But being as how you are a relation of Her ladyship, and since you’ve put your
confidence in me and turned to me to help you, I don’t mind breaking the rules for
once and taking in a message.
‘There’s only one thing, though. I don’t expect you know, but things here are very
different from what they were five years ago. Nowadays Her Ladyship doesn’t run
things here any longer. It’s Master Lian’s wife who does all the managing—You’ll
never guess who that is: Her Ladyship’s niece Wang Xi-feng. You know, Her Ladyship’s
eldest brothers daughter, that we used to call “Feng-ge” when she was a child’
‘Bless you, my dear, for being such a help!’ said Grannie Liu.
‘Oh Grannie, how can you say such a thing?’ said Zhou Rui’s wife demurely. ‘You
know what the old saying is, “He who helps others helps himself.” It’s only a question
of saying a few words. No trouble at all.’
So saying, she instructed the little maid to slip quietly round to the back of old Lady
Jia’s quarters and ask if they were serving lunch yet. The little maid departed on her
errand and the two women resumed their conversation.
‘This Mrs Lian,’ said Grannie Liu: ‘she can’t be more than eighteen or nineteen
years old. She must be a very capable young woman. Fancy her being able to run a
great household like this!’
‘Oh Grannie, you have no idea!’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘Mrs Lian may be young, but
when it comes to doing things, she’s got an older head on her shoulders than any I’ve
ever come across. She’s grown up to be a real beauty too, has Mrs Lian. But sharp!
Well, if it ever comes to a slanging match, she can talk down ten grown men any day
of the week! Wait till you meet her, and you’ll see what I mean. There’s only one
thing, though. She’s a bit too strict with those beneath her.’
As she was speaking, the little maid came back, her errand completed.
‘They’ve finished serving lunch at Her Old Ladyship’s. Mrs Lian is still there.’
Thou Rui’s wife hurriedly rose to her feet and urged Grannie Liu to do likewise.
‘Quick! After she comes out from there she’ll be free for a few minutes while she
has her meal. We must try and catch her then. If we delay a moment longer, people
will start coming in with messages and we shan’t have a chance to speak to her. And
once she goes off for her afternoon nap, we’ve really lost her!’
Grannie Liu got off the kang, adjusted her clothing, con?ducted Ban-er through a
rapid revision of his little stock of phrases and followed Thou Rui’s wife through
various twists and turns to Jia Lian’s quarters. Just before they reached them, Zhou
Rui’s wife planted them both in a covered passage-way while she went on ahead
round the screen wall and into the gate of the courtyard. First ascertaining that Wang
Xi-feng had not yet left Lady Jia’s, she sought out Xi-feng’s chambermaid and
principal confidante, Patience, and primed her with a full account of Grannie Liu’s
antecedents.
‘She has come all this way today to pay her respects,’ she concluded. ‘At one time
Her Ladyship used to see quite a lot of her, which is why I thought it would be in
order for me to bring her in. I thought I would wait for the young mistress to come
back and explain it all to her. I hope she won’t be angry with me for pushing myself
forward.’
Patience at once made up her mind what to do.
‘Let them come in here. They can sit here while they are waiting.’
Zhou Rui’s wife went off again to fetch her charges. As they ascended the steps to the
main reception room, a little maid lifted up the red carpet which served as a portère
for them to enter. A strange, delicious fragrance seemed to reach forward and enfold
them as they entered, producing in Grannie Liu the momentary sensation that she
had been transported bodily to one of the celestial paradises. Their eyes, too, were
dazzled by the bright and glittering things that filled the room. Temporarily
speechless with wonder, Grannie Liu stood wagging her head, alternating clicks of
admiration with pious ejaculations.
From the glittering reception room they passed to a room on the east side of it in
which Jia Lian’s baby daughter slept. Patience, who was standing by the edge of the
kang, made a rapid assessment of Grannie Liu and judged it sufficient to greet her
with a civil ‘how-do-you-do’ and an invitation to be seated.
Grannie Liu looked at the silks and satins in which Patience was dressed, the gold and
silver ornaments in her hair, her beauty of feature which in every respect
corresponded with what she had been told of Wang Xi-feng, and taking the maid for
the mistress, was on the point of greeting her as ‘Gou-er’s aunt, when Zhou Rui’s wife
introduced her as ‘Miss Patience. Then, when Patience shortly afterwards addressed
Zhou Rui’s wife as ‘Mrs Zhou’, she knew that this was no mistress but a very
high-class maid. So Grannie Liu and Ban-er got up on the kang at one side, while
Patience and Zhou Rui’s wife sat near the edge of it on the other, and a little maid
came in and poured them all some tea.
Grannie Liu’s attention was distracted by a persistent tock tock tock tock not unlike
the sound made by a flour-bolting machine, and she could not forbear glancing
round her from time to time to see where it came from. Presently she caught sight of
a sort of boxlike object fastened to one of the central pillars of the room, and a thing
like the weight of a steelyard hanging down from it, which swung to and fro in
ceaseless motion and appeared to be the source of the noise which had distracted
her.
‘I wonder what that can be,’ she thought to herself, ‘and what it can be used for?’
As she studied the strange box, it suddenly gave forth a loud dong! like the sound of
a bronze bell or a copper chime, which so startled the old lady that her eyes nearly
popped out of her head. The dong! was followed in rapid succession by eight or nine
others, and Grannie Liu was on the point of asking what it meant, when all the maids
in the house began scurrying about shouting, ‘The mistress! The mistress! She’ll be
coming out now!’ and Patience and Zhou Rui’s wife hurriedly rose to their feet.
‘Just stay here, Grannie,’ they said. ‘When it is time for you to see her, we shall
come in and fetch you’; and they went off with the other servants to greet their
mistress.
As Grannie Liu sat in silence, waiting with bated breath and head cocked to one side
for her summons, she heard a far-off sound of laughter, followed presently by a
sound of rustling dresses as between ten and twenty women entered the reception
room and passed from it into the room beyond. Then two or three women bearing
large red lacquer boxes took up their positions on the side nearest the room in which
she sat and stood there waiting to be called. A voice in the far room called out, ‘Serve
now, please!’ at which, to judge from the noises, most of the women scuttled off,
leaving only the few who were waiting at table. A long silence ensued in which not so
much as a cheep could be heard; then two women came in bearing a small, low table
which they set down on the kang. It was covered with bowls and dishes containing all
kinds of meat and fish, only one or two of which appeared to have been touched. At
the sight of it Ban-er set up a clamour for some meat and was silenced by Grannie Liu
with a resounding slap.
Just at that moment Zhou Rui’s wife appeared, her face all wreathed in smiles, and
advanced towards Grannie Liu beckoning. Grannie Liu slipped off the kang, lifted
down Ban-er, and exchanged a few hurried whispers with her in the reception room
before waddling into the room beyond.
A dark-red patterned curtain hung from brass hooks over the doorway. Inside, under
the window in the south wall, there was a kang covered with a dark-red carpet. At
the east end of the kang, up against the wooden partition wall, were a back?rest and
bolster, both covered in gold brocade, and a large flat cushion for sitting on, also
glittering with gold thread. Beside them stood a silver spittoon.
Wang Xi-feng had on a little cap of red sable, which she wore about the house for
warmth, fastened on with a pearl ?studded bandeau. She was dressed in a sprigged
peach-pink gown, with an ermine-lined skirt of dark-red foreign crepe underneath it,
and a cloak of slate-blue silk with woven coloured insets and lining of grey squirrel
around her shoul?ders. Her face was exquisitely made-up. She was sitting on the
edge of the kang, her back straight as a ramrod, with a dimin?utive pair of tongs in
her hand, removing the spent charcoal from a portable hand-warmer. Patience stood
beside her carrying a covered teacup on a tiny inlaid lacquer tray. Xi-feng appeared
not to have noticed her, for she neither reached out for the cup nor raised her head,
but continued picking ab?sorbedly at her hand-warmer. At last she spoke:
‘Why not ask them in, then?’
As she did so, she raised her head and saw Zhou Rui’s wife with her two charges
already standing in front of her. She made a confused movement as if to rise to her
feet, welcomed the old lady with a look of unutterable benevolence, and almost in
the same breath said rather crossly to Zhou Rui’s wife, ‘Why didn’t you tell me?’
By this time Grannie Liu was already down on her knees and had touched her head
several times to the floor in reverence to her ‘Aunt Feng’.
‘Stop her, Zhou dear!’ said Xi-feng in alarm. ‘She mustn’t do that, I am much too
young! In any case, I don’t know her very well. I don’t know what sort of relations we
are and what I should call her.’
‘This is the Grannie Liu I was just telling you about,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife.
Xi-feng nodded, and Grannie Liu sat herself down on the edge of the kang Ban-er at
once hid himself behind her back and neither threats nor blandishments would
induce him to come out and make a bow to his ‘Auntie’.
‘Relations don’t come to see us much nowadays,’ said Xi-feng affably. ‘We’re
getting to be quite strangers with everybody. People who know us realize that it is
because you are tired of us that you don’t visit us oftener; but some spiteful people
who don’t know us so well think it’s our fault, because we have grown too proud.’

Grannie Liu invoked the Lord Buddha in pious disavowal of so shocking a view.
‘It’s hard times that keeps us away. We can’t afford to visit. We are afraid that if we
came to see you looking the way we are, you would disown us; and even the people
at the gate might think we were tramps!’
‘Now you are really being too hard on us! What if Grand?father did make a little bit
of a name for himself and we do hold some miserable little appointment? What does
it all amount to? It’s all empty show, really. You know what they say: “Even the
Emperor has poor relations.” It would be strange indeed if we didn’t have a few!’
She turned to Thou Rui’s wife.
‘Have you told Her Ladyship yet?’
‘No, ma’am. I was waiting for your instructions.’
‘Go and have a look, then. If she has anyone with her, you had better leave it; but if
she is free, tell her about their visit and see what she says.’
Zhou Rui’s wife departed on her errand.
Xi-feng told one of the servants to give Ban-er a handful of sweets, and had just
begun a desultory conversation with Grannie Liu when a number of domestics and
underlings of either sex arrived to report on their duties.
‘I am entertaining a guest,’ said Xi-feng to Patience when she came in to announce
their arrival. ‘Let them leave it until this evening. But if anyone has important
business, bring them in and I will deal with it now.’
Patience went out and returned a minute later to say that she had asked them and
no one had any business of special importance, so she had sent them all away.
Xi-feng nodded.
At this point Zhou Rui’s wife returned with a message for Xi-feng.
‘Her Ladyship says she isn’t free today, but that if you will entertain them for her, it
will be just the same as if she were to receive them herself. She says please thank
them very much for coming. And she says if it’s just an ordinary visit she has nothing
more to add; but if they have anything particular to say, she says tell them that they
can say it to you instead.’
‘I hadn’t anything particular in mind,’ said Grannie Liu.
‘Only to look in on Her Ladyship and your mistress. Just a visit to relations.’
‘Well all right then, if you are sure you have nothing to say. But if you have got
anything to say, you really ought to tell the mistress. It will be just the same as if you
were to say it to Her Ladyship.’ Zhou Rui’s wife darted a meaningful look at Grannie
Liu as she said this.
Grannie Liu perfectly well understood the significance of this look, and a blush of
shame overspread her face. Yet if she did not speak up now, what would have been
the purpose of her visit? She forced herself to say something.
‘By rights I ought not to mention it today, seeing that this is our first meeting: but
as I have come such a long way to see you, it seems silly not to speak…’
She had got no further when the pages from the outer gate announced the arrival of
‘the young master from the Ning mansion’ and Xi-feng gestured to her to stop.
‘It’s all right. There is no need to tell me.’ She turned to the pages. ‘Where is Master
Rong, then ?’
A man’s footstep sounded outside and a fresh-faced, willowy youth of seventeen or
eighteen in elegant and expensive-looking winter dress came into the room.
Grannie Liu, acutely embarrassed in this male presence, did not know whether to sit
or stand, and looked round her in vain for somewhere to hide herself. Xi-feng laughed
at her discomfiture.
‘Don’t mind him; just stay where you are! It’s only ray nephew.’
With a good deal of girlish simpering Grannie Liu sat down again, perching herself
obliquely on the extreme edge of the kang.
Jia Rong saluted his aunt Manchu fashion.
‘My father is entertaining an important visitor tomorrow and he wondered if he
might borrow the little glass screen that your Uncle Wang’s wife gave you, to put on
our kang while he is there. We can let you have it back again as soon as he has gone.’
‘You are too late,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I lent it yesterday to someone else.
Jia Rong flashed a winning smile at her and half-knelt on the side of the kang.
‘If you won’t lend it, my father will say that I didn’t ask properly and I shall get a
beating. Come on, Auntie, be a sport! Just for my sake!’
Xi-feng smiled maliciously.
‘I don’t know what’s so special about my family’s things. Heaven knows, you have
enough stuff of your own over there; yet you have only to set eyes on anything of
ours, and you want it for yourselves.’
Jia Rong’s smile flashed again.
‘Please, Auntie! Be merciful!’
‘If it’s the tiniest bit chipped,’ said Xi-feng, ‘I’ll have the hide off you!’
She ordered Patience to take the key of the upstairs room and get some reliable
servants to carry it over. Delighted with his good luck, Jia Rong hurriedly forestalled
her.
‘I’ll get some of my own people to carry it. Don’t put yours to a lot of trouble!’ and
he hurried out.
Xi-feng suddenly seemed to remember something, and called to him through the
window, ‘Rong, come back! ‘
Servants in the yard outside dutifully took up the cry, ‘Master Rong, you’re wanted
back again!’
Jia Rong came hurrying back, wreathed in smiles, and looked at Xi-feng with
eyebrows arched inquiringly.
Xi-feng, however, sipped very intently from her teacup and mused for a while, saying
nothing. Suddenly her face flushed and she gave a little laugh:
‘It doesn’t matter. Come back again after supper. I’ve got company now, and
besides, I don’t feel in the mood to tell you.’
‘Yes, Aunt,’ said Jia Rong, and pursing his lips up in a complacent smile he
sauntered slowly out of the room.
Having all this while had time to collect herself, Grannie Liu began her speech again:
‘The real reason I have brought your little nephew here today is because his Pa and
Ma haven’t anything in the house to eat, and the weather is getting colder,
and—and—I thought I’d bring him here to see you ...’ She gave Ban-er a despairing
push. ‘What did your Pa tell you to say when we got here? What was it he sent us for?
Look at you! All you can do is sit there eating sweets!’
It was abundantly clear to Xi-feng that the old lady was too embarrassed to go on,
and she put her out of her misery with a gracious smile.
‘It’s quite all right. There is no need to tell me. I quite understand.’ She turned to
Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘I wonder if Grannie has eaten yet today ?’
‘We were on our way first thing this morning,’ Grannie Liu chimed in. ‘There was no
time to think about eating.’
Xi-feng gave orders for a meal to be brought in, and Zhou Rui’s wife went out and
presently reappeared with a guest’s portion of various choice dishes on a little table,
which she set down in the east wing, and to which she then conducted Grannie Liu
and Ban-er for their meal.
‘Zhou, dear,’ said Xi-feng, ‘will you keep them company and see that they have
enough to eat? I shan’t be able to sit with them myself.’ Then calling her aside for a
moment she asked, ‘What did Her Ladyship say when you went to report about them
just now?’
‘She said they don’t really belong to the family but were adopted into the clan
years ago when your grandfather and theirs were working in the same office. She
said they haven’t been round much of late years, but in the old days when they used
to visit us we never sent them back empty-handed. She said it was nice of them to
come and see us today and we should be careful to treat them considerately. And
she said if they appear to want anything, she would leave it to you to decide what we
should do for them.’
‘No wonder!’ exclaimed Xi-feng when she had heard this account. ‘I couldn’t
understand how they could be really related to us if I had never even heard of them.’
While they were talking, Grannie Liu came back from the other room having already
finished eating, smacking her lips and sucking her teeth appreciatively, and voicing
her thanks for the repast.
‘Sit down,’ said Xi-feng with a smile. ‘I have something to say to you. I quite
understand what you were trying to tell me just now. As we are relations, we ought
by rights not to wait for you to come to our door before helping you when you are in
trouble; but there are so many things to attend to in this family, and now that Her
Ladyship is getting on a bit she doesn’t always remember them all. And since I took
over the management of the household, I find there are quite a lot of relations that I
don’t even know about. And then again, of course, though we may look thriving
enough from the out?side, people don’t realize that being a big establishment like
ours carries its own difficulties. They won’t believe it if you tell them, but it’s true.
However, since you have come such a long way, and since this is the first time you
have ever said a word about needing help, we obviously can’t let you go back
empty-handed. Fortunately it so happens that I still haven’t touched any of the
twenty taels of silver that Her Ladyship gave me the other day to make clothes for
the maids with. If you don’t mind it being so little, you are very welcome to take it.’
When Grannie Liu heard Xi-feng talk about ‘difficulties’ she concluded that there was
no hope. Her delight and the way in which her face lit up with pleasure when she
heard that she was, after all, to be given twenty taels of sliver can be imagined.
‘We knew you had your troubles,’ she said, ‘but as the saying goes, “A starved
camel is bigger than a fat horse.” Say what you like, a hair plucked from your arm is
thicker than a man’s waist to folks like us!’
Horrified by the crudity of these expressions, Zhou Rui’s wife, who was standing by,
was meanwhile signaling fran?tically to the old lady to stop. But Xi-feng laughed
quite unconcernedly and told Patience to wrap up the silver and also to fetch a string
of cash to go with it. The money was set down in front of Grannie Liu.
‘Here is the twenty taels of silver,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Take this for the time being to make
some winter clothes for the children with. Some time later on, when you have
nothing better to do, look in on us for a day or two for kinship’s sake. It’s late now, so
I won’t try to keep you. Give our regards to everybody who ought to be remembered
when you get back!’
She rose to her feet, and Grannie Liu, with heartfelt ex?pressions of gratitude, picked
up the money and followed Zhou Rui’s wife out of the room.
‘My dear good woman,’ said the latter when they were out of earshot, ‘whatever
came over you? First, when you met her, you couldn’t get a word out; then, when
you did start talking, it was all “your nephew” this and “your nephew” that! I hope
you won’t mind my saying so, but even if the child was a real nephew you would still
need to go a bit easy on the familiarities. Now Master Rong, he is her real nephew.
That’s the sort of person a lady like that calls “nephew”. Where she would come by a
nephew like this one, I just do not know!’
‘My dear,’ replied Grannie Liu with a laugh, ‘when I saw the pretty little darling
sitting there, I took such a liking to her that my heart was too full to speak.’
Back in Zhou Rui’s quarters the two women sat talking for a while. Grannie Liu
wanted to leave a piece of silver to buy something for the Zhou children with, but
Zhou Rui’s wife said she wouldn’t hear of it and refused absolutely to accept anything.
And so, with many expressions of gratitude, the old lady took her leave and set out
once more through the back gate of the mansion.
And if you want to know what happened after she had left, you will have to read the
next chapter.




CHAPTER 7



Zhou Rui’s wife delivers palace flowers and finds Jia
Lian pursuing night sports by day
Jia Bao-yu visits the Ning-guo mansion and has an
agreeable colloquy with Qin-shi’s brother



When Zhou Rui’s wife had finished seeing off Grannie Liu, she went to Lady Wang’s
place to report. Lady Wang, however, was not in her apartment. The maids said that
she had gone off to visit Aunt Xue. Zhou Rui’s wife accordingly went out by the gate
in the east corner of the compound, crossed the eastern courtyard, and made her
way to Pear Tree Court. As she reached the gate of the Court, she came upon Lady
Wang’s maid, Golden, playing on the front steps with a young girl. Golden realized
that Zhou Rui’s wife must have come with a message for Lady Wang and indicated
that her mistress was inside by turning her chin towards the house and shooting out
her lips.
     Zhou Rui’s wife gently raised a side of the portière and entered. She found the
two sisters in the midst of a seemingly interminable discussion of some domestic
odyssey. Not daring to interrupt it, she passed on into the inner room, where Xue
Bao-chai, dressed in workaday clothes, her hair unadorned and twisted in a knot on
top of her head, sat with her maid Oriole over a little table towards the back of the
kang, tracing a pattern for her embroidery. Seeing Zhou Rui’s wife enter, she laid
down her tracing brush, turned towards her with a smile, and invited her to sit with
them.
     ‘How are you, Miss? asked Zhou Rui’s wife, returning her smile and sitting down
on the edge of the kang. ‘I haven’t seen you over our side these last two or three
days. Has Master Bao been upsetting you?’
     ‘Good gracious, no!’ said Bao-chai with a laugh. ‘I’ve had an attack of my old
sickness again and thought I had better rest quietly at home for a day or two. That’s
the only reason.’
     ‘Very sensible!’ said Zhou Ruj’s wife. ‘But what is this sickness of yours, Miss?
Oughtn’t you to call in a doctor and get it properly seen to? It’s no joke when a young
person of your age lets an illness get its grip on them.’
     ‘Oh, don’t talk about my illness I’ said Bao-chai. ‘I don’t know how many doctors
we must have consulted about it, and how many medicines I must have swallowed,
or how much money we must have spent on it - all without any benefit whatsoever.
In the end we were fortunate enough to hear of a monk who specialized in treating
illnesses that other people couldn’t diagnose and asked him to have a look at me. He
said that I had a congenital tendency to overheatedness, but that fortunately, as my
constitution was a strong one, it wasn’t serious. He said the usual medicines
wouldn’t do it any good, and he gave us a prescription supposed to have been
handed down from the Immortals of the Islands. He also gave us a packet of powder
with a very unusual fragrance which he said was to be used as the base. He said that
if each time I had a turn I took just one of the pills made up from this prescription,
the sickness would go away. And the remarkable thing is that they really have proved
quite effective.’
‘What was this prescription, Miss? If you will tell me, I shall try to remember it so
that I can pass it on to others. If I ever met anyone else who had the same sort of
illness, I could do them a charity, couldn’t I?’
‘You don’t know what you are asking,’ said Bao-chai. ‘It’s such a finicky prescription,
it would drive anyone mad trying to make it up. It’s not so much the materials. There
is, after all, a limit to the number of drugs from one part of the world or another that
are available. It’s the timing involved that is so difficult.
      ‘You have to take twelve ounces of stamens of the spring-flowering white
tree-peony, twelve ounces of stamens of the summer-flowering white water-lily,
twelve ounces of stamens of the autumn-flowering white lotus, and twelve ounces of
stamens of the winter-flowering white plum and dry them all in the sun on the day of
the spring equinox of the year im?mediately following the year you picked them in.
Then you have to mix them with the powder I told you about and pound them all up
together in a mortar. Then you must take twelve drams of rain water that fell on the
Rain Days in the second month...
Zhou Rui’s wife laughed.
‘Why, that’s already three years it would take! And suppose it didn’t rain that year
on the Rain Days?’
‘Exactly,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Rain is seldom so obliging. You would just have to wait till
the next year. Then you have to collect twelve drams of dew on the day White Dew in
the ninth month, twelve drams of frost at Frost Fall in the tenth, and twelve drams of
snow at Lesser Snow in the last month of the year, stir these four kinds of water into
the mixture, make it up into pills about the size of a longan, and store the pills in an
old porcelain jar. The jar is supposed to be buried in a flower bed and only dug up
when you have an attack of the illness. Then one of the pills is taken out and
swallowed in hot water into which one and a quarter drams of tincture of
phellodendron has been stirred.’
‘God bless my soul!’ Zhou Rui’s wife exclaimed. ‘You would certainly need some
patience! Why, you might wait ten years before getting all those things at the proper
times!’
‘Well,’ said Bao-chai, ‘we were lucky. Within only a year or two of the monk’s visit
we had managed to get all the ingredients together and were able to make up the
pills without trouble. We brought them with us when we came to live here and have
buried them under one of the pear-trees in the garden.’
‘Has this medicine got a name?’ Zhou Rui’s wife asked.
‘Yes,’said Bao-chai.‘The monk said the pills are ￡alled“Cold Fragrance Pills”.’
Zhou Rui’s wife nodded appreciatively.
‘Tell me, Miss, what exactly is this illness of yours?’
‘It doesn’t really bother me very much. It makes me cough and wheeze a bit. But as
soon as I have taken one of the pills, it goes away.’
Zhou Rui’s wife was about to ask something else when they were interrupted by a
call from Lady Wang:
‘Who have you got in there?’
She hurried back into the outer room to make her report on Grannie Liu. Having
finished it, she waited for some comment from Lady Wang, but finding that none was
forth?coming, was on the point of withdrawing when Aunt Xue smilingly enjoined
her to stay.
‘Just a moment! There is something I should like you to take for me.’
She called to someone outside.
‘Caltrop!’
The rings of the portière rattled and the young girl whom Zhou Rui’s wife had seen a
few minutes before playing on the steps with Golden came into the room.
‘You called, Madam?’
‘Bring me that box with the flowers in!’
Caltrop went into a side room and returned with a small embroidered box.
‘There are twelve artificial flowers in here,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘They were made in the
Imperial Palace, all in the latest fashion. I suddenly thought to myself yesterday what
a pity it was to leave them lying around here doing nothing, and how much nicer it
would be to give them to the girls to wear. I meant to send them round yesterday but
forgot. It’s lucky that you came here today, because you will be able to take them for
me. There are two each for each of the Jia girls. That leaves six. Then two for Miss Lin,
and the remaining four for Mrs Lian.’
‘Keep them for Bao-chai to wear,’ said Lady Wang. ‘What do you want to go
bothering about our girls for?’
‘You don’t know our Bao-chai. She is funny about these things. She has never liked
ornaments or make-up or anything of that sort.’
Zhou Rui’s wife took up the box and went out into the courtyard, where she came
once more upon Golden, sunning herself on the steps.
‘Tell me,’ she asked her, ‘is that little Caltrop the one they are always talking about
who was bought just before they came to the capital? The one they had the murder
trial about?’
‘That’s her,’ said Golden.
At that moment Caltrop herself came skipping up with a sunny smile on her face, and
Zhou Rui’s wife took her by the hand and studied her curiously. Then she turned to
Golden again.
‘You know, there’s something about this child’s face that reminds me of Master
Rong’s wife over at the Ning mansion.’
‘That’s just what I’ve said,’ Golden agreed.
Zhou Rui’s wife asked Caltrop how old she was when she became a slave. Then she
asked her where her parents were, what her age was, and what part of the country
she came from. But to all of these questions Caltrop only shook her head and said
that she didn’t remember.
Zhou Rui’s wife and Golden exchanged glances and sighed sympathetically.
Bearing her box of flowers, Zhou Rui’s wife presently came to the part of the house
behind Lady Wang’s quarters. Grand?mother Jia had recently decided that her
granddaughters were becoming too numerous and declared that she would retain
only Bao-yu and Dai-yu in her own apartments to keep her amused. Ying-chun,
Tan-chun and Xi-chun were to move out into the penthouse behind Lady Wang’s,
with Li Wan to supervise them and keep them company. Thither, accordingly, Zhou
Rui’s wife now directed her steps.
A number of little maids were sitting under the eaves there waiting to be called, and
just as she arrived, Ying-chun’s maid Chess and Tan-chun’s maid Scribe came through
the portière, each carrying a teacup on a tray, from which she deduced that the two
cousins must be inside together.
On entering the room, Zhou’s wife found Ying-chun and Tan-chun sitting by the
window playing Go. She presented the flowers and explained who they were from,
and the two girls stopped their game for a moment to bow their thanks, and gave
orders to the maids to take charge of them.
‘Where is Miss Xi-chun?’ Zhou Rui’s wife inquired.
‘Isn’t she in the next room?’ said the maids; and there in fact she proved to be,
playing with the little nun Sapientia from Water-moon Priory. She asked Zhou Rui’s
wife what she had come for, and when Zhou Rui’s wife took the flowers from the box
and explained, she laughed:
‘I was telling Sapientia that one of these day I am going to have my hair shaved and
go off with her to be a nun, when just at that very moment you came in with these
flowers. What shall I do with flowers when I have no hair to stick them in?’
Further pleasantries followed from the others present.
Xi-chun told one of the maids to take the flowers and look after them.
‘When did you arrive?’ Zhou Rui’s wife asked Sapientia. ‘And where’s that precious
Mother Superior of yours gone off to, bald-headed old mischief?’
‘We arrived first thing this morning,’ said Sapientia. ‘Mother Euergesia went off to
visit the Yu mansion after she had seen Her Ladyship. She told me to wait for her
here.’
Have you had this month’s donation yet?’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘It was due on the
fifteenth.’
Sapientia said that she didn’t know.
‘Who looks after the monthly donations nowadays?’ asked Xi-chun.
‘Yu Xin,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife.
‘That explains it. As soon as Mother Euergesia arrived, Yu Xin’s wife was in here like
a shot and they were chattering together for ages. I expect that’s what it was about.’
After gossiping a bit longer with Sapientia, Zhou Rui’s wife made her way to Xi-feng’s
quarters. To get there she had to go down a passage-way between two walls, under
the windows at the back of Li Wan’s apartments, along the foot of an ornamental
wail, and through a gateway in the western cornet of the compound. When she
entered Xi-feng’s reception room, a maid sitting on the threshold of the inner room
hurriedly waved her away and told her to go across to the other side of the house.
Taking the hint, Zhou Rui’s wife tiptoed quietly into the room opposite, where she
found the baby’s nurse patting her rhythmically to make her sleep.
‘Is the mistress taking her afternoon nap?’ she asked the nurse in a low whisper. ‘I
think you’ll have to wake her, even if she is.’
The nurse smiled, grimaced, and shook her head. Zhou Rui’s wife was about to ask
her what she meant when she heard a low laugh in what was unmistakably Jia Lian’s
voice from the room opposite. It was followed almost immediately by the sound of
the door opening, and Patience came out carrying a large copper basin which she
asked one of the maids to fetch water in.
‘Ah, Mrs Zhou!’ she said, catching sight of Zhou Rui’s wife and crossing into the
room opposite ‘What brings you back again?’
         Zhou Rui’s wife hastily rose to her feet and picking up the box, proferred it
to Patience and explained her mission. Patience opened the lid, selected four of the
flowers, and slipped away again for several minutes. She came back with two still in
her hand, which she gave to a little page called Sunshine.
‘Take these to Master Rong’s wife over in the Ning mansion and tell her they are for
her to wear,’ she said. Then turning to Zhou Rui’s wife she asked her to convey
Xi-feng’s thanks to the donor.
Zhou Rui’s wife now made her way towards Grandmother Jia’s apartments. Just as
she was coming out of the covered passage-way, she ran head-on into her daughter,
all dressed up in her best clothes having just arrived on a visit from her
mother-in-law’s.
‘What’s suddenly brought you here at a time like this ?’ she asked her daughter.
‘How have you been keeping, Mother? I’ve been waiting at your place for hours for
you to come back. What’s been keeping you all this time? I got tired of waiting. I
thought I’d go and say “hullo” to Her Old Ladyship, and now I was just on my way to
see Her Ladyship. Have you still not finished then? What’s that you’ve got in your
hand?’
Zhou Rui’s wife laughed.
‘Today is not my lucky day! First of all someone called Grannie Liu turned up, so like
a fool I spend half the day rushing around with her. Then, as if that wasn’t enough,
Her Ladyships sister sees me and gets me delivering flowers to the young ladies. I
haven’t finished yet. Now what have you come here today for? Something’s gone
wrong, I’ll be bound !’
‘I don’t know how you always manage to guess, Mother, but you’re right: it has. I’ll
be honest with you. My man had a cup too much to drink the other day and got into
a fight with someone, and now, out of spite, they are trying to stir up trouble for him.
They say his papers aren’t in order, and they’ve reported him to the yamen and want
to get him deported back South to his old village. So I thought I’d come and ask your
advice, Mother, and see if you couldn’t get someone here to put in a word for him.
Do you think there’s anyone who would be able to help?’
‘I knew it would be something like this,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘Well, cheer up, it’s
not so serious as all that! You just go back and wait while I take these flowers to Miss
Lin. You can’t see Her Ladyship now. She and the young mistress are both busy.’
     The daughter obediently turned back to her mother’s quarters. As she went, she
said pleadingly,
     ‘Be as quick as you can, Mother, won’t you?’
     ‘Yes, yes, yes. I’ll be as quick as I can! You young people take everything so
tragically! Lack of experience, that’s what it is!’ said Zhou Rui’s wife, and moved on to
Dai-yu’s room.
     Dai-yu was not in her own room, but with Bao-yu, trying to undo metal puzzles.
     ‘Miss Lin,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife with a smile, ‘Mrs Xue asked me to give you these
flowers.’
     ‘What flowers ?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Let me see!’
     He stretched out his arm, took the box from Zhou Rui’s wife, and looked. Two
artificial flowers, exquisitely fashioned by Palace craftsmen out of silk gauze, lay
inside it. Dai-yu glanced over his arm into the box.
     ‘Am I the only one getting these, or have the others had some too?’
     ‘All the young ladies are getting them,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘These two are for
you, Miss.’
     ‘I thought as much,’ said Dai-yu sneeringly. ‘I get the leavings when everyone
else has had their pick.’
     Zhou Rui’s wife received this sally in silence, not daring to retort.
     ‘What were you doing at my aunt’s place, Zhou?’ Bao-yu asked.
     ‘Her Ladyship was there, and I had something to tell her.
Then while I was over there, Mrs Xue took the opportunity of giving me these flowers
to deliver for her.’
          Was Miss Bao-chai there?’ Bao-yu asked. ‘Why hasn’t she been round these
last few days?’
‘She’s not very well.’
Bao-yu turned to his maids.
‘Which of you will go and see Miss Bao-chai for me? Say that Miss Lin and I send
our regards to her and her mother, and ask her if her illness is any better and what
she’s taking for it. Say that I really ought to go myself, but that as I’ve just got back
from my lessons and have caught a bit of a cold, I shall be coming round another day.’
Snowpink said that she would go, and she and Zhou Rui’s wife left the room together
and went their separate ways.
This son-in-law of Zhou Rui’s who had got himself into trouble was none other than
Jia Yu-cun’s old friend, Leng Zi-xing. He had recently become involved in a lawsuit
arising out of the sale of some antiques, and had asked his wife to get strings pulled
for him at the mansion. Zhou Rui’s wife made light of the affair, confident of her
employers’ power to in?fluence. A word to Xi-feng in the evening, and it would be as
good as settled.



*

At lighting-up time that evening Xi-feng came in partial négligé(having removed her
ornaments for the night) to report on the day’s affairs to Lady Wang.
‘Today I received the things sent us by the Zhen family. The Zhens have their own
boat delivering seasonal produce for the New Year, so I have given their people our
presents to the Zhens to take back on their return journey.’
Lady Wang nodded.
‘I’ve got our birthday presents ready for the Earl of Lin?an’s mother,’ continued
Xi-feng. ‘Who would you like us to send with them ?’
‘Just see which women are free and send four of them,’ replied Lady Wang. ‘You
don’t have to ask me about things like that I’
‘Today Cousin Zhen’s wife invited me to spend tomorrow with them at the other
house,’ Xi-feng continued. ‘Is there anything tomorrow that needs doing here ?’
‘Whether there is or not,’ said Lady Wang, ‘I don’t see that it matters. Generally
when she brings an invitation it is for all of us, and you are naturally too busy to go.
This time the invitation is to you personally, which shows that she had deliberately
arranged this in order to give you a rest. The thought is a kind one, and it would be
ungrateful to refuse. I think you ought to go.’
By now Li Wan and the three girls had also arrived for their evening duty, and when
all had wished Lady Wang good night they departed to their different rooms.
Next day, as soon as Xi-feng had completed her toilet, she first reported to Lady
Wang and then went to take her leave of Grandmother Jia. Hearing that she was
going to the other house, Bao-yu said he wanted to go too, and Xi-feng was obliged
to say that she would take him and to stand waiting for him while he changed his
clothes. The two then got into a mule-cart and were soon inside the Ning-guo
mansion, where Cousin Zhen’s wife You-shi, her son Jia Rong, her little
daughter-in-law Qin-shi, and a large number of women attendants and maids were
standing outside the inner gate ready to welcome them.
You-shi’s encounters with Xi-feng were always the oc?casion of good-humoured
banter. Taking Bao-yu by the hand and chatting to Xi-feng, she conducted them both
into the main reception room, where they all sat down and were served tea by
Qin-shi.
‘Well,’ said Xi-feng, ‘what have you asked me here for? Something nice, I hope! If
it’s a present, you’d better bring it now; I’m a busy woman!’
Before You-shi could think of a suitable retort, one of the women attendants replied
for her:
‘You ought not to have come, Mrs Lian! Now that you’re here, we’ve got you in our
power and you’ll have to do what we say for a change!’
At that moment Jia Rong came in and paid his respects to the visitors. Bao-yu asked
what had happened to Cousin Zhen.
‘He’s gone into the country to see Father,’ said You-shi. Then she added, ‘It’s not
much fun for you sitting here. Why don’t you go off and amuse yourself inside?’
‘You’ve chosen a good day to come, Uncle Bao,’ said little Qin-shi. ‘Last time you
were here you wanted to see my brother. Well, today he’s here. He’s sitting in the
study at this very moment. Why don’t you go in and see him?’
Bao-yu was for rushing off straight away. You-shi hurriedly ordered some servants to
go after him in discreet attendance.
‘Well now, just a minute I’ said Xi-feng. ‘Why not ask him in here so that I can see
him too?’
‘Oh dear, I don’t think that would do at all!’ said You-shi. ‘Some people’s children
aren’t used to rackety ways like ours. Some people’s children are quiet and refined. If
they were to meet a termagant like you, they might die of laughing.’
‘He’ll be lucky if I don’t laugh at him,’ said Xi-feng cheer-fully. ‘He’d better not try
laughing at me!’
‘He’s very, very shy, Auntie,’ said Jia Rong. We are afraid that if you saw him it might
only irritate you.’
‘Fiddlestick!’ said Xi-feng. ‘I don’t care if he’s a three-faced wonder with eight arms,
I still want to see him. Stop fatting about and bring him in, or I’ll box your ears!’
Jia Rong cringed in mock alarm.
‘Yes, Auntie! No need to get so fierce! We’ll bring him in straight away.’
They both laughed, and Jia Rong disappeared for a while and presently came back
leading a youth who, though some?what thinner than Bao-yu, was mote than his
equal in freshness and liveliness of feature, in delicacy of complexion,
hand?someness of figure, and grace of deportment, but whose painful bashfulness
created a somewhat girlish impression. He approached Xi-feng and made his bow
with a shy con?fusion which delighted her.
‘You’ve met your match!’ she said to Bao-yu with a laugh, nudging him playfully.
Then, leaning forward and gripping the boy’s hand in her own, she drew him down
beside her and proceeded in a very deliberate manner to ask him how old he was,
what books he was reading, and various other matters -among them his name, which
was Qin Zhong.
          When the maids and womenfolk in attendance on Xi-feng realized that she
was about to meet Qin Zhong and that they had come without the requisite material
for a First Meeting present, they had sent some of their number back to consult
Patience in the other house. Patience had, at her own dis?cretion, selected a suitable
length of material and two little ‘Top of the List’ solid gold medallions to give the
mes?sengers. These gifts now arrived for Xi-feng (who thought them somewhat on
the meagre side) to give to Qin Zhong. When he and his sister had formally thanked
her, the company sat down to lunch, after which You-shi, Xi-feng and Qin?-shi settled
down to a game of cards, while Bao-yu and Qin Zhong left the table to converse
elsewhere.
When Bao-yu first set eyes on Qin Zhong it had been as though part of his soul had
left him. For a while he stared blankly, oblivious to all around him, while a stream of
idle fancies passed through his mind.
‘How perfect he is! Who would have believed there could be such perfection? Now
that I have seen him I know that I am just a pig wallowing in the mud, a mangy dog!
Why, why did I have to be born in this pretentious aristocratic household? Why
couldn’t I have been born in the family of some poor scholar or low-grade clerk?
Then I could have been neat him and got to know him, and my life would have been
worth living. Though I am so much richer and more nobly born than he, what use are
my fine clothes but to covet up the dead and rotten wood beneath? What use the
luxuries I eat and drink but to fill the cesspit and swell the stinking sewer of my inside?
O rank and riches! How you poison everything!’
At the same time, Qin Zhong, struck by Bao-yu’s rare good looks and princely bearing
and— even more perhaps—by the golden coronet and embroidered clothing and the
train of pretty maids and handsome pages who attended him, was thinking:
‘No wonder my sister raves about him whenever his name is mentioned! Why did I
have to be born in a poor respectable family? How I should have liked to get to know
him: to have shared moments of warmth and affection with him! But it was not to
be!’
Each, plunged in reverie, for a while said nothing. Then Bao-yu asked Qin Zhong
about his reading, and Qin Zbong replied—a full, frank reply, without the trappings of
polite?ness: and presently they were in the midst of a delightful conversation and
were already like old friends.
After a while tea and various confections were brought in.
‘We two shan’t be drinking any wine,’ Bao-yu said to the ladies. ‘May we have a
plate or two of these things set out on the little kang in the other room? We can talk
in there without disturbing you,’
The two boys moved into the inner room for their tea.
          In between plying Xi-feng with wine and delicacies, Qin?shi slipped in for a
word with Bao-yu.
‘My brother’s quite young, Uncle Bao. Please, for my sake, don’t mind him if he
does anything to offend you! He may be shy, but he’s got quite a nasty temper. He’s
not really easy to get on with at all.
          ‘You go along I’ said Bao-yu with a smile. ‘We shall be all right!’
          After a few admonitory words to her brother, Qin-shi went back to look
after Xi-feng.
          Some minutes later Xi-feng and You- shi sent a servant in to inquire whether
the boys would like anything else to eat, adding that they had only to ask if they
wanted anything. Bao-yu promised that they would; but his mind was not on eating
and drinking, and he continued to question Qin Zhong about his life at home.
‘My private tutor resigned last year,’ Qin Zhong told him. ‘Father is quite old, and as
his health is not very good and his job keeps him terribly busy, he hasn’t been able to
do any?thing yet about getting me another one. At the moment I am lust going over
old lessons on my own at home. The trouble is, though, that if you want to get on in
a subject, you really need one or two like-minded people to study with you, so that
every so often you can all discuss what you have been reading...’
          ‘Exactly!’ Bao-yu put in eagerly, not waiting for him to finish. ‘We have a
private school in our family to which any members of the clan who can’t manage
private tuition may send their children, and boys from related families who aren’t in
the clan can also be admitted. I have been at a loose end ever since my tutor went
home on leave, and Father would have liked me to go to this school for revision until
he gets back next year and I can be taught privately again. But Grandmother said that
with so many boys in the school I should be sure to get up to mischief, and it would
do me more harm than good. She also said I couldn’t in any case go then, because I’d
only just recovered after several days in bed. And so it got put off.
‘From what you say, your father is worried about the same problem as mine; so
why not tell him about this school when you get back today and ask him if you can
join? I should be there to keep you company, and we could both help each other. I
think it would be a marvellous idea.’
‘The other day when the question of engaging a tutor came up, Father mentioned
this school of yours as a possible alternative,’ said Qin Zhong. ‘He was going to come
over and have a word with my sister’s father-in-law about it and get him to
recommend me; but they were busy here at the time and it didn’t seem the right
moment to bother them with a little thing like this. However, if you are really of the
opinion that I could be of some service to you, even if it’s only grinding your ink or
cleaning your ink-stone, do please arrange it as soon as you can, before we both get
too rusty! We should be relieving our parents of an anxiety and having the pleasure
of each other’s company at one and the same time; so it would be a good
arrangement from every point of view.’
‘Don’t worry!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’ll tell Cousin Lian’s wife presently, when we join the
others. Then when we get back home tonight, you must tell your father and I shall
tell my grandmother. There’s no reason that I can see why this shouldn’t be settled
immediately.’
They had concluded their discussion in gathering dusk, and now moved back into the
lamplit outer room and watched the ladies at their cards for a while. When the latter
had finished and had added up their scores, it appeared that Qin-shi and You-shi had
lost to Xi-feng and owed her a dramatic enter?tainment at which the players and the
drinks were to be provided at their expense. In the course of dinner, which was now
served and at which they were joined by the two boys, it was decided that this
should take place in two days’ time.
As it was now quite dark, You-shi gave her women orders to see that two
menservants were detailed to attend Qin Zhong on his way back home. The women
were gone on their errand an unusually long time and eventually Qin Zhong rose to
take his leave.
‘Who has been chosen to go with him?’ You-shi asked.
‘They have asked Big Jiao,’ said the women, ‘but it seems that he is terribly drunk
and swearing at everybody.’
You-shi and Qin-shi were indignant.
‘Whatever did they want to go and ask him for? Any of the younger ones would
have done. What was the point of provoking him?’
‘I always said you were too soft with people,’ said Xi-feng. ‘You really mustn’t let
servants get away with it like this. I never heard of such a thing !’
‘You don’t know Big Jiao,’ said You-shi. ‘Even Father couldn’t do anything with him,
let alone Zhen. When he was young he went with Grandfather on three or four of his
campaigns and once saved his life by pulling him from under a heap of corpses and
carrying him to safety on his back. He went hungry himself and stole things for his
master to eat; and once when he had managed to get half a cupful of water, he gave
it to his master and drank horse’s urine himself. Because of these one or two acts of
heroism he was always given special treatment during Grandfather’s lifetime; so
naturally we don’t like to upset him now. But since he’s grown old he has let himself
go completely. He drinks all the time, and when he’s drunk he starts abusing
everybody—literally everybody. I’ve repeatedly told the steward not to give him jobs
to do—to behave exactly as though he were dead and ignore him completely. Why
on earth should he have chosen him today?’
     ‘I know this Big Jiao all right,’ said Xi-feng, ‘and I still say that you are too weak.
You ought to send him away. Right away. Send him to live on one of your farms: that
would put a stop to his nonsense!’ She turned to the women and asked if her own
carriage was ready yet. The women replied that it was waiting, and she rose to take
her leave and, taking Bao-yu by the hand, went out on to the steps, attended by
You-shi and the rest.
     In the flickering light of many lanterns the pages stood stiffly to attention on the
pavement below, while Big Jiao, encouraged by Cousin Zhen’s absence to indulge his
talent for drunken abuse, was getting to work on the Chief Steward, Lai Sheng,
accusing him of being unfair, of always dropping on the weakest, and so on and so
forth.
     ‘If there’s a cushy job going you give it to someone else, but when it’s a question
of seeing someone home in pitch bloody darkness, you pick on me. Mean, rotten
bugger! Call yourself a steward? Some steward! Don’t you know who Old Jiao is? I
can lift my foot up higher than your head! Twenty years ago I didn’t give a damn for
anybody, never mind a pack of little misbegotten abortions like you!’
     He was just getting into his stride when Jia Rong came out to see Xi-feng off in
her carriage. The servants shouted to Big Jiao to stop, but without success. Impatient
of the old man’s insolence, Jia Rong cursed him angrily.
     ‘Tie him up,’ he said to the servants. ‘We shall see if he is still so eager for death
tomorrow morning, when he has sobered up a bit.’
     But Big Jiao was not to be intimidated by such as Jia Rong. On the contrary, he
staggered up to him and bel?lowed even louder.
     ‘Oh ho! Little Rong, is it? Don’t you come the Big Master stuff with me, sonny
boy! Never mind a little bit of a kid like you, even your daddy and your granddaddy
don’t dare to try any funny stuff with Old Jiao. If it wasn’t for Old Jiao, where would
you lot all be today, with your rank and your fancy titles and your money and all the
other things you enjoy? It was your great-granddad, whose life I saved when he was
given up for dead, that won all this for you, by the sweat of his brow. And what
reward do I get for saving him? Nothing. Instead you come to me and you put on
your Big Master act. Well, I’ll tell you something. You’d better watch out. Because if
you don’t, you’re going to get a shiny white knife inside you, and it’s going to come
out red!’
     ‘You’d better hurry up and send this unspeakable creature about his business,’
said Xi-feng to Jia Rong from her carriage. ‘It’s positively dangerous to keep a man
like this on the premises. If any of our acquaintance get to know that a family like
ours can’t keep even a semblance of discipline about the place, we shall become a
laughing-stock.’
Jia Rong assented meekly.
     Several of the servants, seeing that Big Jiao had got quite out of hand and that
something had to be done at all costs, rushed up and overpowered him, and
throwing him face downward on the ground, frog-marched him off to the stables. By
now even Cousin Zhen was being included in his mal?edictions, which became wilder
and noisier as he shouted to his captors that he wanted to go to the ancestral temple
and weep before the tablet of his old Master.
    ‘Who would ever have believed the Old Master could spawn this filthy lot of
animals?’ he bawled. ‘Up to their dirty little tricks every day. I know. Father-in-law
pokes in the ashes. Auntie has it off with nevvy. Do you think I don’t know what
you’re all up to? Oh, we “hide our broken arm in our sleeve”; but you don’t fool me.’
    Terrified out of their wits at hearing a fellow-servant utter such enormities, the
grooms and pages tied him up and stuffed his mouth with mud and horse-dung.
    Big Jiao’s last words had been clearly audible to Xi-feng and Jia Rong, though
they were a considerable distance away, but they both pretended not to have heard.
Bao-yu, sitting in the carriage with Xi-feng, was less inhibited.
    ‘Feng, what did he mean when he said “Father-in-law pokes in the ashes”?’
     ‘Hold your tongue!’ Xi-feng snapped back at him, livid. ‘It’s bad enough for a
person in your position to even listen to such drunken filth, but to go asking
questions about it, really! Just wait till I tell your mother! You’re going to get the
biggest hiding you’ve ever had in your life!’
     Terrified by her vehemence, Bao-yu implored forgiveness. ‘Please, Feng, don’t
tell her! I promise never to say those words again.’
     Xi-feng’s manner at once became soothing and indulgent.
     ‘That’s my good little cuzzy! When we get back I must tell Grandma to make
them explain to the school about Qin Zhong and arrange for him to be admitted
soon.’
     As they talked, the carriage bore them back into Rong-guo House. But what
happened there will be told in the chapter which follows.
CHAPTER 8



Jia Bao-yu is allowed to see the strangely
corresponding golden locket
And Xue Bao-chai has a predestined encounter
with the Magic Jade



When Bao-yu and Xi-feng were back and had seen the others, Bao-yu told
Grandmother Jia of his wish to have Qin Zhong admitted to the clan school. He
pointed out that a congenial study-companion would stimulate him to greater effort
and gave her a glowing account of Qin Zhong’s amiable qualities. Xi-feng was at hand
to lend her support. She told Grandmother Jia that Qin Zhong would be calling on her
within a day or two to pay his respects. Their infectious enthusiasm put the old lady
in a high good humour, which Xi-feng took ad?vantage of to ask if she would
accompany her to the dramatic entertainment which her opponents had promised in
two days’ time.
     In spite of her years Grandmother Jia loved any kind of excitement and when,
two days later, You-shi came to fetch Xi-feng, the old lady did in fact accompany them,
taking Lady Wang, Dai-yu and Bao-yu as well. By about noon, however, she was ready
to go back and rest, and Lady Wang, who disliked noise and excitement, took the
opportunity to leave with her. This left Xi-feng as principal guest, and she moved into
the place of honour and stayed there for the rest of the day, enjoying herself
immensely and not returning until late in the evening.
     After accompanying Grandmother Jia back to her apartment and seeing her
safely settled down for her nap, Bao-yu would have liked to go back and watch some
more plays but was afraid that his presence would be an inconvenience to Qin?shi
and his other ‘juniors’. Remembering that Bao-chai had been at home unwell during
the past few days and that he had still not been to see her, he thought he would go
there instead and pay her a call, but fearing that if he went the quickest way through
the corner gate behind the main hall he might meet with some entanglement on the
way or, worse, run into his father, he decided to go by a more circuitous route.
The maids and nurses who attended him had been expecting him to change into his
everyday clothes, but seeing him go out of the inner gate again without doing so,
followed after him, assuming that he was going back to the other mansion to watch
the plays. To their surprise, however, he turned left when he reached the covered
passage-way instead of going straight on, and made off in a north-easterly direction.
But he was out of luck, for as he did so he found himself facing Zhan Guang and Shan
Ping-ren, two of the literary gentlemen patronized by his father, who were walking
towards him from the opposite direction. They descended on him gleefully, one of
them clasping him round the waist, the other taking him by a hand.
‘Angelic boy! How seldom one has the pleasure! Is it really you, or is this some
delightful dream?’
They prattled on for what seemed an age before finally releasing him. As they were
going, one of the old nurses detained them a moment longer.
‘Have you two gentlemen just come from the Master’s?’
The two gentlemen nodded and smiled conspiratorially:
‘Sir Zheng is in his little study in the Su Dong-po Rooms, having his afternoon nap.
All is well!’
They hurried off. Bao-yu smiled too, relieved that his father was safely out of the way.
Turning once again, this time north-wards, he made his way swiftly towards Pear Tree
Court.
Once more he was unlucky. The Clerk of Stores Wu Xindeng, a man called Dai Liang
who was foreman at the granary, and five other foremen were just at that moment
coming out of the counting-house together and, catching sight of Bao-yu, at once
stood respectfully to attention. One of their number, a buyer called Qian Hua who
had not seen Bao-yu for some considerable time, hurried forward, dropped on his
right knee, and touched his hand to the ground in the Manchu salute. Bao-yu
smilingly extended a hand to raise him up. The men all relaxed in smiles.
‘I saw some of your calligraphy in town the other day, Master Bao,’ said one of
them. ‘It’s getting really good! When are you going to give us a few sheets for
ourselves, to put up on the wall?’
‘Where did you see it?’ Bao-yu asked.
‘Any number of places,’ the men told him. ‘Everyone has been praising it no end.
They even come to us asking for specimens.’
‘You can have some easily enough if you really want to,’ Bao-yu said. ‘You have only
to ask one of my boys.’
He hurried on. The men waited for him to pass before dispersing about their
business.
To omit further details of his progress, Bao-yu came at last to Pear Tree Court, and
going first into Aunt Xue’s room, found her giving instructions to her maids about
some em?broidery. Her response to his greeting was to draw him towards her and
clasp him to her bosom in an affectionate embrace.
‘What a nice, kind boy to think of us on a cold day like this! Come up on the kang
and get warm!’
She ordered a maid to bring him some ‘boiling hot tea’.
Bao-yu inquired whether Cousin Pan was at home. Aunt Xue sighed.
‘Pan is like a riderless horse: always off enjoying himself somewhere or other. He
won’t spend a single day at home if he can help it.’
‘What about Bao-chai? Is she quite better?’
‘Ah yes, of course!’ said Aunt Xue. ‘You sent someone to ask about her the other
day, didn’t you? That was very thoughtful of you. I think she’s inside. Go in and have
a look! It’s warmer in there than here. You go in and sit down, and I’ll be with you in
a moment when I’ve finished tidying up.’
Bao-yu got down from the kang and going to the doorway of the inner room, lifted
up the rather worn-looking red silk curtain which covered it. Bao-chai was sitting on
the kang inside, sewing. Her lustrous black hair was done up in a simple bun without
any kind of ornament. She was wearing a honey-coloured padded gown, a
mulberry-coloured sleeveless jacket with a pattern in gold and silver thread, and a
greenish-yellow padded skirt. All her clothing had the same sensible, rather
well-worn look about it.
    He saw no hint of luxury or show,
    only a chaste, refined sobriety;
       to some her studied taciturnity
       might seem to savour of duplicity;
but she herself saw in conformity
       the means of guarding her simplicity.
‘Have you quite recovered, cousin?’ Bao-yu asked.
Raising her head, Bao-chai saw Bao-yu enter the room. She rose quickly to her feet
and smiled at him.
‘I am quite better now. It was nice of you to think of me.’ She made him sit on the
edge of the kang and ordered Oriole to pour him some tea. Then she proceeded to
ask him first about Grandmother Jia, then about Lady Wang and then about the girls,
while her eye took in the details of his dress.
He had a little jewel-encrusted coronet of gold filigree on the top of his head and a
circlet in the form of two dragons supporting a pearl round his brow. He was dressed
in a narrow-sleeved, full-skirted robe of russet-green material covered with a pattern
of writhing dragons and lined and trimmed with white fox-fur. A
butterfly-embroidered sash with fringed ends was fastened round his waist, and from
his neck hung a padlock-shaped amulet, a lucky charm, and the famous jade said to
have been inside his mouth when he was born.
Bao-chai’s eye came to rest on the jade.
‘I am always hearing about this famous stone of yours,’ she said smilingly, ‘but I
have never yet had a chance of examining it really closely. Today I think I should like
to have a look.’
She moved forward as she spoke, and Bao-yu too leaned towards her, and taking the
stone from his neck, put it into her hand.
Looking at it as it lay on her palm, she saw a stone about the size of a sparrow’s egg,
glowing with the suppressed, milky radiance of a sunlit cloud and veined with
iridescent streaks of colour.
Reader, you will, of course, remember that this jade was a transformation of that
same great stone block which once lay at the foot of Greensickness Peak in the Great
Fable Mountains. A certain jesting poet has written these verses about it:

Nü-wa’s stone-smelting is a tale unfounded:
On such weak fancies our Great Fable’s grounded.
Lost now, alack! and gone my heavenly stone—
Transformed to this vile bag of flesh and bone.
For, in misfortune, gold no longer gleams;
And bright jade, when fate frowns, lack-lustre seems.
Heaped charnel-bones none can identify
Were golden girls and boys in days gone by.

The words which the scabby-headed monk had incised on the stone when he found it
lying in its diminished shape under Greensickness Peak were as follows.

(On the front side)

MAGIC JADE

Mislay me not, forget me not,
And hale old age shall be your lot.

(On the reverse side)
1.Dispels the harms of witchcraft.
2.Cures melancholic distempers.
3.Foretells good and evil fortune.

    When Bao-chai had looked at the stone all over, she turned back to the
inscription on the front and repeated it a couple of times to herself out loud:


‘Mislay me not, forget me not,
And hale old age shall be your lot.’

    ‘Why aren’t you pouring the tea?’ she asked Oriole. ‘What are you standing
there gawping for?’
Oriole laughed.
‘Because those words sounded like a perfect match to the ones on your necklace.’
‘So you have an inscription, too?’ said Bao-yu pricking up his ears. ‘I must have a
look.
‘Don’t take any notice of her!’ said Bao-chai. ‘There is no inscription.’
‘Cousin, cousin,’ said Bao-yu entreatingly, ‘you’ve had a look at mine. Be fair!’
Bao-chai could not escape the logic of this entreaty.
‘There is a motto on it which someone gave us once for luck and which we had
engraved on it,’ she admitted. ‘That’s the only reason I always wear it; otherwise it
would be too tiresome to have a heavy thing like this hanging round one’s neck all
the time.’
As she was speaking she undid the top buttons of her jacket and gown and extracted
the necklace that she was wearing over the dark red shift beneath. Its pendant was a
locket of shining solid gold, bordered with sparkling gems. There was a line of writing
engraved on either side of it which together made up the words of a charm:

Ne’er leave me, ne’er abandon me:
And years of health shall be your fee.

He recited them a couple of times and then recited the word:
of his own Inscription a couple of times.
‘Why, yes!’ he cried delightedly. ‘The two inscriptions are a perfect match!’
‘A scabby-headed old monk gave Miss Bao-chai the words,’ said Oriole. ‘He said
they must be engraved on something made of gold...’
Bao-chai angrily cut her short, telling her to mind her busi?ness and pour the tea. To
change the subject she asked Bao-yu where he had just come from.
Bao-yu was now sitting almost shoulder to shoulder with her and as he did so
became aware of a penetrating fragrance that seemed to emanate from her person.
‘What incense do you use to scent your clothes with, cousin?’ he asked. ‘I have
never smelt such a delicious perfume.’
‘I can’t stand incense perfumes,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I could never see the point of
smoking perfectly good, clean clothes over an incense-pot.’
‘In that case, what is this perfume I can smell?’
Bao-chai thought for a moment.
‘I know! It must be the Cold Fragrance Pill I took this morning.’
‘What’s a Cold Fragrance Pill ?’ said Bao-yu with a laugh. ‘Won’t you give me one to
try?’
‘ Now you’re being silly again. Medicine isn’t something to be taken for
amusement.’
Just at that moment the servants outside announced ‘Miss Lin’ and almost
simultaneously Dai-yu came flouncing into the room. Catching sight of Bao-yu she let
out a wail of mock dismay.
‘Oh dear! I have chosen a bad time to come!’
The others rose and invited her to be seated.
‘Why did you say that?’ Bao-chai asked her.
‘If I had known he was coming, I shouldn’t have come myself.’
‘What exactly do you mean by that?’
‘What do I mean by that ?’ said Dai-yu. ‘I mean that if I only come when he does,
then when I don’t come you won’t have any visitors. Whereas if we space ourselves
out so that he comes one day and I come the next, it will never get either too lonely
or too noisy for you. I shouldn’t have thought that needed much explaining.’
Observing that Dai-yu was wearing a greatcoat of red camlet over her dress, Bao-yu
asked whether it was snowing outside.
‘It’s been snowing for some time,’ said one of the old women standing below the
kang.
Bao-yu asked someone to go and fetch his winter cape.
‘You see!’ said Dai-yu. ‘When I come, he has to go!’
‘Who said anything about going?’ said Bao-yu. ‘I just want them to have it ready for
me.’
‘It’s no time to go now, while it’s still snowing,’ said Bao-?yu’s old nurse, Nannie Li.
‘Much better stay here and play with your cousins. In any case, I think your Aunt Xue
is getting tea ready for you. I’ll send a maid to fetch your cape. Shall I tell the boys
outside they can go?’
Bao-yu nodded, and Nannie Li went outside and dismissed the pages.
By now Aunt Xue had finished laying tea, which included a number of
delicious-looking things to eat, and invited the cousins to partake. While they were
doing so, Bao-yu happened to mention the excellent goose-foot preserve made by
his Cousin Zhen’s wife that he had eaten at the Ning mansion only two days
previously. Aunt Xue at once hurried out and fetched some of her own for him to try.
‘This really needs to be eaten with wine,’ said Bao-yu.
Aunt Xue gave orders for some of the best wine to be decanted; but Nannie Li
disapproved.
‘He shouldn’t have wine, Mrs Xue.’
‘Oh go on, Nannie I’ Bao-yu pleaded good-humouredly. ‘I shall only drink one cup.’
‘It’s no good!’ said Nannie Li. ‘I don’t mind if you drink a hogshead as long as your
grandmother or your mother is there. But look at the trouble I got into the other day
just because when I had my back turned for a moment some wretched person who
ought to have known better gave you a sip or two to humour you! I didn’t hear the
end of it for days after.
‘You don’t know how wild he can be, Mrs Xue,’ she continued. ‘And he gets even
worse when he’s had something to drink. With Her Old Ladyship you can never tell.
One day when she’s feeling high-spirited she’ll let him drink as much as he likes;
other days she won’t let him touch a drop. But come what may, I’m always the one
that gets into trouble.’
‘Poor old thing!’ said Aunt Xue with a laugh. ‘Have a drink yourself and stop
worrying! I’ll see that he doesn’t drink too much. And if Lady Jia does say anything, I
shall take full responsibility? She turned to one of the maids: ‘Come on’ now! Pour
Nannie a nice warm cup of wine to keep the cold out!’
Nannie Li could scarcely sustain her objection after this and went off with the other
servants to have her drink.
‘Don’t bother to heat the wine for me,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I prefer it cold.
‘Good gracious, that will never do! ‘said Aunt Xue. ‘You mustn’t drink wine cold, or
when you write your hand will shake!’
‘I’m surprised at you, Cousin Bao!’ said Bao-chai with a smile. ‘With all your
enthusiasm for out-of-the-way learning, fancy not knowing a thing like that! Wine
has an exceptionally fiery nature, and therefore must be drunk warm in order to be
quickly digested. If it is drunk cold, it congeals inside the body and harms it by
absorbing heat from the internal organs. From this day on you must reform! No more
cold wine!’
Dai-yu, who sat cracking melon-seeds between her teeth throughout this homily,
smiled ironically. Just at that moment her maid Snowgoose came hurrying in with a
little hand-warmer for her.
‘Who told you to bring this?’ Dai-yu asked her. ‘Very kind of them, I am sure. But I
was not actually freezing to death here.’
‘Nightingale told me to bring it, Miss. She was afraid you might be cold.’
‘I am glad you are so ready to obey her. Generally when 1 tell you to do anything it
goes in one ear and out the other; yet anything she tells you to do is followed out
more promptly than an Imperial Edict!’
Bao-yu knew perfectly well that these words were really intended for him, but made
no reply, beyond laughing good-?humouredly. Bao-chai, long accustomed to Dai-yu’s
peculiar ways, also ignored them. But Aunt Xue protested.
‘You’ve always been rather delicate and you’ve always felt the cold badly. Surely it
was nice of them to think of you?’
‘You don’t understand, Aunt,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It doesn’t matter here, with you; but
some people might be deeply offended at the sight of one of my maids rushing in
with a hand-warmer. It’s as though I thought my hosts couldn’t supply one
themselves if I needed it. Instead of saying how thoughtful the maid was, they would
put it down to my arrogance and lack of breeding.’
‘You are altogether too sensitive, thinking of things like that,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Such a
thought would never have crossed my mind!’
Bao-yu had soon finished his third cup of wine and Nannie Li once more came
forward to restrain him. But Bao-yu, who was now warm and happy and in the midst
of a hilarious conversation with his cousins, was naturally unwilling to stop, and
pleaded humbly with the old lady for a reprieve.
‘Nannie darling, just two more cups and then I’ll stop!’
‘You’d better look out,’ said Nannie Li. ‘Your father’s at home today. He’ll be asking
you about your lessons before you know where you are.’
At these words all Bao-yu’s happiness drained away. Slowly he set down his cup and
bowed his head in dejection.
‘Don’t spoil everyone’s enjoyment,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Even if Uncle does call for you, you
can always say that Aunt Xue is keeping you. I think that old Nannie of yours has had
a cup too many and is looking for a bit of excitement at our expense. She gave him a
gentle nudge to encourage a more valiant spirit in him, muttering, as she did so,
‘Take no notice of the old fool! Let’s go on enjoying ourselves and not mind about
her!’
Nannie Li knew only too well what Dai-yu was capable of.
‘Now Miss Lin,’ she said, ‘don’t you go taking his part! If you encourage him he’s
only too likely to do what you say!’
Dai-yu smiled dangerously. ‘Take his part? Why should I want to encourage him? You
are over-cautious, my dear Nannie. After all, Lady Jia often lets him drink; why should
it matter if Mrs Xue lets him have a cup or two? I suppose you think he can’t be
trusted to drink here because Mrs Xue is not one of us?’
Nannie Li did not know whether to feel upset or amused. ‘Really, Miss Lin. Some of
the things you say cut sharper than a knife!’
Bao-chai could not suppress a giggle. She pinched Dai-yu’s cheek playfully.
‘Really, Miss Frowner, the things you say! One doesn’t know whether to grind one’s
teeth or laugh!’
Aunt Xue laughed too.
‘Don’t be afraid, my boy! Heaven knows I’ve got little enough to offer you when
you come to see me. You mustn’t get upset over a small thing like this, or I shall feel
quite uncomfortable. Drink as much as you like; I’ll look after you! You may as well
stay to supper, in any case; and even if you do get drunk, you can always spend the
night here.’ She told a maid to heat some more wine. ‘There! Auntie will drink a cup
or two with you, and then we shall have some supper.’
Bao-yu’s spirits began to revive a bit under his aunt’s encouragement.
‘Keep an eye on him,’ said Nannie Li to the maids. ‘I’m lust going back for a few
minutes to change my clothes.’ Then aside to Aunt Xue she said, ‘Don’t let him drink
too much, Mrs Xue!’ and went off home.
Although two or three old women still remained after her departure, none felt very
much concern for Bao-yu, and as soon as Nannie Li was out of the way they quietiy
slipped off about their own concerns, leaving, of the attendants who had come with
him, only two small maids, whose only anxiety was to please their young master by
indulging him as much as possible.
Fortunately Aunt Xue, by exercising great tact and finesse, managed to spirit the wine
away when Bao-yu had drunk only a few more cups, and to replace it with a hot, sour
soup of pickled bamboo-shoots and chicken-skin. He drank several bowls of this with
great relish and then ate half a bowl of green-rice gruel. After that, when Bao-chai
and Dai-yu had finished eating, he drank several cups of very strong tea. At this point
Aunt Xue felt sure that he would be all right.
As Snowgoose and the other maids had now finished supper too and were once
more in attendance, Dai-yu asked Bao-yu if he was ready to go. He looked at her
blearily through tired eyes.
‘If you want to go, I will go with you.’
Dai-yu rose to her feet. ‘We really ought to go. We’ve been here practically all day!’
The two of them began saying their good-byes.
A maid came forward with Bao-yu’s rain-hat and he lowered his head slightly for her
to put it on. Holding the brim of the great saucer-shaped red felt top, she jerked it up
and prepared to bring it down, aiming the inside part at his crown.
‘Stop!’ he cried impatiently.’ You have got to go easy with a great clumsy thing like
that! Haven’t you ever seen anyone putting one of these things on before? You had
better let me do it myself.’
‘Come here!’ said Dai-yu standing on the edge of the kang. ‘I’ll put it on for you!’
Bao-yu went and stood in front of her. Putting her two hands round the inner cap,
Dai-yu eased it gently down until its rim fitted over his golden headband, so that the
walnut-sized red woollen pompom of the headband was left quiver?ing outside the
cap on its flexible golden stem.
‘There!’ she said, after a few further adjustments. ‘Now you can put on your cape.’
Bao-yu took the cape from his maid and fastened it himself.
‘The nurses who came with you are still not back,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Perhaps you had
better wait a bit.’
‘We wait for them?’ said Bao-yu. ‘We have got the maids. We shall be all right.’
But Aunt Xue was not satisfied, and ordered two of her own women to see the
cousins home.
As soon as they were back they thanked the women for their trouble and went
straight in to see Grandmother Jia, who had not yet had her supper. She was
delighted to learn that they had been with Aunt Xue, and observing that Bao-yu, had
had more than a little to drink, she told him to go and rest in his room and not come
out again, and instructed the servants to keep a careful watch over him.
Remembering which servants usually attended him, she asked what had become of
Nannie Li. The maids dared not tell her the truth, which was that she had gone
home.
‘I think she must have had something to do,’ said one of them. ‘She came in when
we did just now, but went out again almost immediately.’
‘Why worry about her ?’ said Bao-yu over his shoulder, swaying slightly as he made
his way to the bedroom. ‘She’s better looked after than you are! If it weren’t for her I
might live a few days longer!’
Inside his room he found a writing-brush and ink laid out on the desk. Skybright was
the first to greet him.
‘You’re a nice one!’ she said. ‘You made me mix all this ink for you this morning, sat
down in a state of great en?thusiasm, wrote just three characters, threw down the
brush again, rushed out, and left me waiting here all day for you to come back and
finish. Now you just sit down here and use this ink up, and perhaps I’ll let the matter
pass!’
Skybright’s words awoke in Bao-yu a recollection of the morning’s events.
‘What became of the three characters I wrote?’
Skybright laughed. ‘You’re really drunk, aren’t you! This morning before you went to
the other house you gave careful instructions that they were to be pasted up over
the outside door. I was afraid that someone else might make a mess of it, so I got up
on a ladder and spent half the morning sticking them up myself. My hands are still
numb from doing it.’
‘I’d forgotten.’ Bao-yu smiled. ‘If your hands are cold, I’ll warm them for you.’ He
took both her hands in his own and led her outside to inspect the sheet of calligraphy
newly pasted up over the doorway. Just then Dai-yu arrived.
‘I want you to tell me honestly, cousin,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Which of these three
characters do you think is the best?’
Dai-yu looked up at the three characters above the door:

RED RUE STUDY


‘They are all equally good. I didn’t know you could write so beautifully. You must do
one for me some time!’
‘You’re just saying that to humour me,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Where is Aroma?’ he asked
Skybright.
Skybright shot out her lips and indicated the kang inside, on which Aroma, fully
clothed, was lying fast asleep.
‘Just look at that!’ said Bao-yu with a laugh. ‘It’s a bit early for sleep, isn’t it?’
He turned once more to Skybright. ‘When I was having lunch at the other house
today there was a plate of bean-curd dumplings. I remembered how fond you are of
those things and asked Mrs Zhen if I could have some to eat in the evening. She had
them sent over for me. Did you get them all right?’
‘Don’t talk to me about those dumplings!’ said Skybright.
‘As soon as they arrived I realized that they must be for me, but as I’d only just
finished eating, I put them on one side meaning to eat them later. Then after a while
Nannie Li came in and caught sight of them. "I don’t expect Bao-yu will want these,"
she said. “I think I’ll take them for my grand children"; and she had them sent round
to her house.’
While Skybright was talking, Snowpink came in carrying some tea on a tray. Bao-yu
invited Dai-yu to have some, to the great merriment of the maids, who pointed out
that she had slipped away some minutes before.
After drinking about half a cupful, Bao-yu suddenly thought of the tea he had drunk
early that morning.
‘When you made that Fung Loo this morning,’ he said to Snowpink, ‘I remember
telling you that with that particular brand the full flavour doesn’t come out until after
three or four waterings. Why have you given me this other stuff? This would have
been just the time to have the Fung Loo.’
‘I was keeping it for you,’ said Snowpink, ‘but Nannie Li came and drank it all.’
With a flick of the wrist Bao-yu hurled the cup he was holding on to the floor, where
it smashed noisily, breaking into innumerable pieces and showering Snowpink’s skirt
with hot tea. He jumped angrily to his feet.
‘Is she your mistress that you should all treat her with such reverence? Merely
because I drank her milk for a few days when I was a baby she is as spoiled and
pampered as though she were some sort of divinity. Let’s get rid of the old woman
now and have done with it!’
And he strode off without more ado to tell Grandmother Jia that he wanted his old
nurse dismissed.
All this time Aroma had been only pretending to sleep, hoping by this means to
engage Bao-yu’s attention and provoke some coquetry between them. As long as the
talk dwelt on calligraphy and Skybright’s dumplings there seemed no pressing need
for her to get up; but when she heard him break a teacup and grow really angry she
hurriedly rose to her feet and intervened to restrain him.
By this time someone had arrived from Grandmother Jia’s room to inquire what all
the noise was about. Aroma pre?tended that she had smashed the cup herself by
slipping on some snow while fetching tea. Having disposed of the inquirer, she then
proceeded to exhort Bao-yu.
‘Dismiss her by all means, if you really want to! But we could all like to leave with
her; so while you are about it, why not make a clean sweep and dismiss the lot of us?
I am sure you will find plenty of other good servants to replace us with.’
Bao-yu had nothing to say to this, and Aroma and the rest helped him onto the kang
and started undressing him. He kept trying to tell them something as they did so, but
an object seemed to impede his tongue and his eyelids were growing increasingly hot
and heavy. Soon the maids had him lying down between covers. Aroma took off the
‘Magic jade’, wrapped it in a piece of silk, and slipped it under the quilt, so that it
should not be cold on his neck the next morning. By this time Bao-yu was already
asleep, having dropped off as soon as his head touched the pillow.
While this was going on, Nannie Li and the other old women had arrived back at last.
Learning that Bao-yu was drunk, they dared not approach him and soon went off
again, having satisfied themselves by whispered exchanges that he was safely asleep.

*

Bao-yu awoke next morning to hear someone announcing that ‘Master Rong from
the other house’ had brought Qin Zhong over to pay his respects. Bao-yu hurried out
to re?ceive them and conducted Qin Zhong into the presence of Grandmother Jia.
Observing that Qin Zhong’s good looks and gentle demeanour admirably qualified
him to become Bao-yu’s study-companion, Grandmother Jia was pleased, and made
him stay for tea and then dinner, after which she sent him to be introduced to Lady
Wang and the rest. Everybody loved Qin-shi and was delighted to meet this charming
younger brother, and there were First Meeting presents from everybody waiting for
him when he left. Grandmother Jia’s was an embroidered purse enclosing a little God
of Literature in solid gold to signify that literary success was in the bag’.
‘Since your home is so far away,’ she said to Qin Zhong as he was leaving, ‘the
weather may sometimes make it incon?venient for you to go back at night. In that
case, do please stay here with us! And mind that you always keep with your Uncle
Bao and don’t go getting into mischief with those young ragamuffins at the school!’
Qin Zhong received these admonitions with deference and then went home to report
on the day’s events to his father.
Qin Zhong’s father, Qin Bang-ye, was one of the Secretaries in the Public Buildings
Department of the Board of Works and a man in his middle sixties. He had lost his
wife early, and finding himself still childless at the age of fifty, had adopted a boy and
a girl from an orphanage. The boy had died, leaving only the girl Ke-er, or ‘Ke-qing’ as
she was more elegantly renamed, who had grown up into an extremely charming and
vivacious young woman and been married into the Jia family, with whom her
adoptive father had long had a con?nection.
Qin Bang-ye fathered Qin Zhong when he was fifty-three and the boy was now
twelve years old. His tutor had returned south the year before, and he had been
revising old lessons at home ever since. Qin Bang-ye had himself been on the point of
speaking to his daughter’s in-laws about the possibility of getting Qin Zhong admitted
into the Jia clan school as an external scholar when the happy accident of Qin
Zhong’s meeting with Bao-yu occurred. Bang-ye knew of Jia Dai-ru, the master in
charge of the school, as one of the leading elder scholars of the day, under whose
tutelage there would be every hope of Qin Zhong’s making rapid strides in his
education and eventually obtaining an advancement. He was therefore delighted that
the matter had been so easily con?cluded.
There was only one difficulty. Knowing the sort of style in which the Jias lived,
Bang-ye realized that he would have to dip deeply into his pocket, and his official
salary left that pocket only meagrely supplied. However, since this was a matter
which concerned the whole future of his son, there was nothing for it but to strain
his credit to the utmost. By borrowing a bit here and a bit there he was able to get
to?gether a sum of twenty-four taels of silver which he made up into a packet and
laid reverently before Jia Dai-ru when he took Qin Zhong to the old teacher’s house
to make his kotow. Nothing now remained but for Bao-yu to choose an aus?picious
day on which the two of them could begin school together.
Their entry into the school was the occasion of a tumultuous incident of which an
account will be given in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 9
A son is admonished and Li Gui receives
an alarming warning
A pupil is abused and Tealeaf throws the
classroom in an uproar



In the last chapter we left Qin Bang-ye and his son waiting for a message from the Jia
household to tell them when Qin Zhong was to begin school. Bao-yu was impatient
to see Qin Zhong again and sent word to say that it was to be the day after next.
When the appointed day arrived, Bao-yu rose in the morning to find that Aroma had
already got his books, brushes and other writing materials ready for him and was
sitting disconsolately on the side of his bed. Seeing him get up, she roused herself
and helped him to do his hair and wash. He asked her the cause of her despondency.
     ‘What’s upset you this time, Aroma? I can’t believe you are worried about being
left alone while I am at school.’
     ‘Of course not!’ said Aroma with a laugh. Learning is a very good thing. Without
it you would fritter all your life away and never get anywhere. I only hope that you’ll
see to it that you are learning when you are meant to be and that, when you are not,
you will be thinking about home and not getting into scrapes with the other boys;
because then you would be in real trouble with your father. And though you talk a lot
about the need for effort and self-improvement, it would really be better to do too
little work than too much. For one thing you don’t want to bite off more than you
can chew; and for another you don’t want your health to suffer. At least, that’s how it
seems to me, so you mustn’t mind my saying so.’
      Each time Aroma paused, Bao-yu answered ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. She continued:
      ‘I have packed your big fur gown for the pages to take. Mind you put it on if you
find it cold at the school. It won’t be like here, where there is always someone else to
think of these things for you. I’ve also given them your foot-warmer and your
hand-warmer. You’ll have to see that they give the charcoal a stir from time to time.
They’re such a lazy pack of good-for-nothings, they’ll be only too pleased to do
nothing if you don’t stand over them. You could freeze to death for all they cared.’
‘Don’t worry!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I know how to do it myself. And don’t go getting
gloomy, all of you, cooped up here while I am away. Try to spend as much time as you
can with my Cousin Lin.’
His dressing was now completed and Aroma urged him to begin his visits to
Grandmother Jia, Jia Zheng and Lady Wang. After a few parting instructions to
Skybright and Musk, he went off to his grandmother’s, where he had to listen to
more admonitions, then on to Lady Wang’s, and then outside to the study to see his
father, Jia Zheng.
Jia Zheng was in conversation with his literary gentlemen when Bao-yu entered the
room and made his salutation. Hear?ing him announce that he was off to school to
resume his studies, Jia Zheng smiled sarcastically.
‘I think you had better not use that word “studies” again in my hearing, unless you
want to make me blush for you. In my opinion you might just as well be left to fool
around as before, since that is all you seem fit for. At all events, I don’t want you here.
I find your presence in a place like this con?taminating.’
The literary gentlemen rose to their feet with nervous laughter.
‘Come, come, Sir Zheng! You are too hard on him! Two or three years from now our
young friend will be carrying all before him! He has left his old, childish ways behind
him now –haven’t you boy? Quite reformed. Come!’—two of the older men took
Bao-yu by the hands and hurried him from the room—’I am sure it must be time now
for your breakfast. To breakfast! To breakfast!’
Jia Zheng asked who was in attendance on Bao-yu. There was a ringing ‘Sir!’ from
outside, and three or four strapping fellows entered the study and saluted Manchu
fashion. Jia Zheng recognized the foremost one as Li Gui, the son of Bao-yu’s old
wet-nurse, Nannie Li, and addressed himself to him.
‘You have attended Bao-yu during all his lessons in the past. What precisely has he
been doing? Stuffing his head with worthless nonsense and acquiring a fine new
stock of knavish tricks, I shouldn’t wonder! Wait until I have a little time to spare: I’ll
have your hide off first and then settle accounts with that good-for-nothing son of
mine!’
‘Sir!’
Li Gui sank terrified to his knees, snatched off his cap, and knocked the ground
several times with his forehead.
‘Master Bao has read the first three books of the Poetry Classic, sir, up to the part
that goes

                          Hear the happy bleeding deer
Grousing in the vagrant meads…

That’s the truth, sir. I wouldn’t tell a lie.’
This novel version of the well-known lines provoked a roar of laughter from the
literary gentlemen. Even Jia Zheng could not restrain a smile,
‘If he read thirty books of the Poetry Classic,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘it would still be
tomfoolery. No doubt he hopes to deceive others with this sort of thing, but he does
not deceive me. Give my compliments to the Headmaster and tell him from me that I
want none of this trifling with the Poetry Classic or any other ancient literature. It is
of the utmost importance that he should thoroughly understand and learn by heart
the whole Four Books before he attempts anything else.’
‘Sir!’
Seeing that Jia Zheng had nothing more to say, Li Gui and the other servants rose to
their feet again and withdrew.
All this time Bao-yu had been waiting for them in the courtyard outside, scarcely
daring to breathe. As they came out, dusting their knees, Li Gui said,
‘Did you hear that, young master? “Have my hide off first” he said. Some people’s
servants are respected for their masters sakes, but not us. All we get is beatings and
hard words. So spare a thought for us in future, will you?’
‘Don’t be upset, old chap!’ said Bao-yu. Tomorrow I’ll treat you all.’
‘Little ancestor,’ Li Gui replied, ‘nobody’s looking for treats. All we ask is that once
in a while—just once in a while—you should do what you are told.’
They were now back at Grandmother Jia’s apartment. Qin Zhong had already arrived
and was engaged in conversation with the old lady. As soon as the two friends had
greeted each other they took their leave.
Bao-yu suddenly remembered that he had not yet seen Dai-?yu and hurried to her
room to say good-bye. He found her by the window making herself up at the mirror.
Her answer to his announcement that he was off to begin school was smiling but
perfunctory:
‘Good. I wish you every success. I’m sorry I can’t see you off.’
‘Wait till I get back and have had my supper, cousin,’ said Bao-yu, ‘and I will give
you a hand with that rouge.’
He chatted with her for quite a bit longer before finally tearing himself away. As he
was going she suddenly called after him so that he stopped:
‘Aren’t you going to say good-bye to your cousin Bao-chai?’
Bao-yu smiled but said nothing and went straight off to school with Qin Zhong.



*

The Jia clan school was situated at no great distance from Rong-guo House. It was a
charitable foundation which had been established many years previously by the
founder of the family and was designed for the sons and younger brothers of those
members of the clan who could not afford to pay for private tuition. All members of
the clan holding official posts were expected to contribute towards its expenses and
mem?bers of advanced years and known integrity were chosen to be its masters. As
soon as Bao-yu and Qin Zhong arrived they were introduced to the other students
and then set to work at once on their lessons.
From now on the two friends were inseparable, arriving at school and leaving school
together and sitting beside each other in class. Grandmother Jia herself became very
fond of Qin Zhong. She was always having him to stay for three or four nights at a
time and treated him exactly as if he were one of her own great-grandchildren. And
because she realized that his family was not very well off, she frequently helped out
with clothes and the like. Within a month or two he was a familiar and accepted
member of the Rong household.
Bao-yu had always been impatient of social conventions, preferring to let sentiment
rather than convention dictate the terms of his relationships. It was this which now
prompted him to make Qin Zhong the following proposal:
‘You and I are schoolmates and pretty much the same age. Let us in future forget all
this “uncle” “nephew” business and address each other exactly like friends or
brothers!’
Qin Zhong was at first too timid to comply; but as Bao-yu persisted and went on
calling him ‘brother’ or ‘Jing-qing’ (which was his school-name) whenever he spoke
to him, Qin Zhong himself gradually fell into the habit of addressing Bao-yu as an
equal.
All the pupils at the clan school were either members of the Jia clan or relations by
marriage; but as the proverb rightly says, ‘there are nine kinds of dragon and no two
kinds are alike’. Where many are gathered together the wheat is sure to contain a
certain amount of chaff; and this school was no exception in numbering some very
ill-bred persons among its pupils.
The two new boys, Qin Zhong and Bao-yu, were both as beautiful as flowers; the
other scholars observed how shrinking and gentle Qin Zhong was, blushing almost
before you spoke to him and timid and bashful as a girl; they saw in Bao-yu one
whom nature and habit had made humble and accommodating in spite of his social
position, always willing to defer to others in the interest of harmony; they observed
his affectionate disposition and familiar manner of speech; and they could see that
the two friends were devoted to each other. Perhaps it is not to be wondered at that
these observations should have given rise to certain suspicions in the minds of those
ill-bred persons, and that both in school and out of it all kinds of ugly rumours should
have circulated behind their backs.
When Xue Pan learned, some time after moving into his aunt’s place in the capital,
that the establishment included a clan school plentifully stocked with young males of
a certain age, his old enthusiasm for ‘Lord Long-yang’s vice’ was re?awakened, and
he had hastened to register himself as a pupil. His school-going was, needless to say,
a pretence—‘one day fishing and two days to dry the nets’ as they say—and had
nothing to do with the advancement of learning. Having paid a generous fee to Jia
Dai-ru, he used his membership of the school merely as a means of picking up
‘soul-mates’ from among his fellow-students. It must with regret be recorded that a
surprisingly large number of the latter were deluded into becoming his willing victims
by the prospect of receiving those ample advances of money and goods which he
was in a position to offer.
Among them were two amorous young creatures whose names and parentage
escape us but who, because of their glamorous looks and affected manners, were
universally known by the nicknames of ‘Darling’ and ‘Precious’. Although their
fellow-students much admired them and entertained towards them feelings not at all
conducive to that health of mind which the Young Person should at all times
endeavour to cultivate, they were deterred from meddling with them for fear of what
Xue Pan might do.
When Qin Zhong and Bao-yu joined the school it was only to be expected that they
too should fall under the spell of this charming pair; but like the rest they were
inhibited from overt declaration of their feelings by the knowledge that Xue Pan was
their ‘friend’. Their feelings were reciprocated by Darling and Precious, and a bond of
mutual attraction grew up be?tween the four, which nevertheless remained
unexpressed, except for the significant looks that every day passed between them
across the classroom, or the occasional rather too loud utterance to a neighbour of
some remark really intended for the ears of the opposite pair.
     They were persuaded that these cryptic communications had escaped the notice
of their fellows; but they were wrong. Certain young hooligans among their
classmates had long since discerned the true nature of what was going on, and while
the two handsome couples were engaged in their silent and (as they thought) secret
communion, these others would be winking and leering behind their backs or
becoming suddenly convulsed with paroxysms of artificial coughing.
It happened that one day Jia Dai-ru was called home on business and left the class
with the first half of a fourteen word couplet to complete, telling them that he would
be back on the morrow to take them over the next passage in their reading and
putting his eldest grandson Jia Rui in charge of the school during his absence. Xue
Pan had by now stopped coming in even for roll-call, and so on this occasion he too
was out of the way. The opportunity was too good to miss, and Qin Zhong and
Darling, after a preliminary exchange of glances, both asked to be excused and went
round to the rear courtyard to converse.
‘Does your father mind what friends you have?’ Qin Zhong had got no further than
this question when there was a cough behind them. The two boys spun round and
saw that it came from their classmate ‘Jokey’ Jin. Darling had a somewhat impetuous
nature which now, fired by a mixture of anger and shame, caused him to round
sharply on the intruder.
‘What’s that cough supposed to mean? Aren’t we allowed to talk if we want to?’
Jokey Jin leered: ‘If you’re allowed to talk, aren’t I al?lowed to cough if I want to?
What I’d like to know is, if you’ve got something to say to each other, why can’t you
say it out openly? Why all this guilty secrecy? But what’s the good of pretending? It’s
a fair cop. You let me in on your game and I won’t say anything. Otherwise there’ll be
trouble!’
With furious blushes the other two protested indignantly that they did not know
what he was talking about.
Jokey Jin grinned. ‘Caught you in the act, didn’t I?’ He began to clap his hands and
chant in a loud, guffawing voice,

                          ‘Bum-cake!
                          Bum-cake!
                          Let’s all have a
                          Bit to eat!’

Angry and indignant, Qin Zhong and Darling hurried back into the classroom and
complained to Jia Ruj that Jokey Jin was persecuting them.
This Jia Rui was a spineless, unprincipled character who, as a means of obliging the
boys to treat him, always displayed the most shameless favouritism in his settlement
of class-room disputes. In return for money, drinks, and dinners, he had lately given
Xue Pan a free hand in his nefarious activities—had, indeed, not only refrained from
interfering with him, but even ‘aided the tyrant in his tyranny’.
Now Xue Pan was very inconstant in his affections, always blowing east one day and
west the next. He had recently abandoned Darling and Precious in favour of some
newly discovered sweetheart, just as previously he had abandoned Jokey Jin in
favour of Darling and Precious. It followed that in this present confrontation Jia Rui,
to his chagrin, could not hope to gain any rewards by the exercise of his usual
par?tiality. Instead of blaming this vexatious state of affairs on Xue Pan’s fickleness,
however, he directed all his resentment against Darling and Precious, for whom he
felt the same unreasonable jealousy as motivated Jokey Jin and the rest.
Qin Zhong’s and Darling’s complaint at first put Jia Rui in somewhat of a quandary,
for he dared not openly rebuke Qin Zhong. He could, however, give his resentment
outlet by making an example of Darling; so instead of dealing with his complaint, he
told him that he was a trouble-maker and followed this up with so savage a
dressing-down that even Qin Zhong went back to his seat humiliated and crestfallen.
Jokey Jin, now thoroughly cock-a-hoop, wagged his head and tutted in a most
provoking manner and addressed wound?ing remarks to no one in particular, which
greatly upset Darling and Precious for whose ears they were intended. A furious
muttered altercation broke out between them across the intervening desks. Jokey Jin
insisted that he had caught Qin Zhong and Darling in flag rante delicto.
‘I ran into them in the back courtyard, kissing each other and feeling arses as plain
as anything. I tell you they had it all worked out. They were just measuring
themselves for size before getting down to business.’
Reckless in his hour of triumph, he made these wild al?legations, unmindful of who
might hear them. But one heroic soul was moved to mighty anger by his wanton
words. This was Jia Qiang, a member of the Ning-guo branch of the family of the
same generation as Jia Rong. He had lost both his parents when a small child and
been brought up by Cousin Zhen. At sixteen he was even more handsome and
dashing than Jia Rong and the two youths were inseparable friends.
     Any establishment as large as the Ning household always contains a few
disgruntled domestics who specialize in tra?ducing their masters, and a number of
disagreeable rumours concerning Jia Qiang did in fact begin to circulate among the
servants which seem to have reached the ears of Cousin Zhen, for, partly in
self-defence (since they involved him too), he moved Jia Qiang out of the house and
set him up in a small establishment of his own somewhere in the city.
     Jia Qiang possessed a very shrewd brain under his daz?zlingly handsome exterior
His attendance at the school, however, was no more than a blind to his other
activities, principal among which were cock-fighting, dog-racing, and botanizing
excursions into the Garden of Pleasure; but with a doting Cousin Zhen to protect him
on the one hand and Jia Rong to aid and comfort him on the other, there was no one
in the clan who dared thwart him in anything he did.
Since Qin Zhong was the brother-in-law of his best friend, Jia Qiang was naturally
unwilling to stand by and see him abused in so despiteful a manner without doing
anything to help. On the other hand he reflected that there would be certain
disadvantages in coming forward as his cham?pion.
‘Jokey Jin, Jia Rui, and that lot are all friends of Uncle Xue,’ he thought. ‘For that
matter, I’m a friend of Uncle Xue myself. If I openly stick up for Qin Zhong and they go
and tell old Xue, it’ll make things rather awkward between us. On the other hand, if I
don’t interfere at all, Jokey Jin’s rumours are going to get quite out of hand. This calls
for a stratagem of some kind which will shut the little beast up without causing too
much embarrassment afterwards.’
Having thought of a plan, he pretended that he wanted to be excused, and slipping
round to the back, quietly called over Bao-yu’s little page Tealeaf and whispered a
few inflammatory words in his ear.
Tealeaf was the most willing but also the youngest and least sensible of Bao-yu’s
pages. Jia Qiang told him how Jokey Jin had been bullying Qin Zhong. ‘And even
Bao-yu came in for a share,’ he said. ‘If we don’t take this Jin fellow down a peg, next
time he is going to be quite insufferable.’
Tealeaf never needed any encouragement to pick a fight, and now, inflamed by Jia
Qiang’s message and open incitement to action, he marched straight into the
classroom to look for Jokey Jin. And there was no ‘Master Jin’ when he saw him,
either: it was ‘Jin! Who do you think you are?’
At this point Jia Qiang began to scrape his boots on the floor and make a great
business of straightening his clothes and glancing out of the window at the sky,
muttering to himself as he did so, ‘Ah, yes. Hmn. Must be about time.’ Going up to Jia
Rui, he informed him that he had an engagement which necessitated his leaving early,
and Jia Rui not having the courage to stop him, allowed him to slip away.
Tealeaf had by now singled out Jokey Jin and grabbed him by the front of his jacket.
‘Whether we fuck arseholes or not,’ he said, ‘what fucking business is it of yours?
You should be bloody grateful we haven’t fucked your dad. Come outside and fight it
out with me, if you’ve got any spunk in you!’
‘Tealeaf!’ Jia Rui shouted agitatedly. ‘You are not to use such language in here!’
Jokey Jin’s face turned pale with anger.
‘This is mutiny! I don’t have to take this sort of thing from a slave. I shall see your
master about this’ —and he shook himself free of Tealeaf and made for Bao-yu,
intending to seize and belabour him.
As Qin Zhong turned to watch the onslaught, he heard a rushing noise behind his
head and a square inkstone launched by an unseen hand sailed past it and landed on
the desk oc?cupied by Jia Lan and Jia Jun.
Jia Lan and Jia Jun belonged to the Rong-guo half of the clan and were in the same
generation as the other Jia Lan, the little son of Li Wan and nephew of Bao-yu. Jia Jun
had lost his father in infancy and was doted on by his widowed mother. Jia Lan was
his best friend, which is why they always sat next to each other in school. Though Jia
Jun was among the youngest in the class, his tiny body contained an heroic soul. He
was extremely mischievous and completely fearless. With the impartial interest of an
observer he had watched a friend of Jokey Jin’s slyly aim the inkstone at Tealeaf; but
when it fell short and landed right in front of him on his own desk, smashing a
porcelain water-bottle and showering his books with inky water, his blood was up.
‘Rotten swine!’ he shouted. ‘If this is a free-for-all, here goes!’ and he grabbed at
the inkstone intending to send it sailing back. But Jia Lan was a man of peace and
held it firmly down.
‘Leave it, old chap! It’s none of our business,’ he coun?selled.
Jia Jun was not to be restrained, however. Deprived of the inkstone, he picked up a
satchel full of books and raising it in both hands above his head, hurled it in the
direction of the assailant. Unfortunately his body was too small and his strength too
puny for so great a trajectory, and the satchel fell on the desk occupied by Bao-yu
and Qin Zhong. It landed with a tremendous crash, scattering books, papers,
writing-brushes and inkstones in all directions and smashing Bao-yu’s teabowl to
smithereens so that tea flowed over everything round about. Nothing daunted, Jia
Jun leaped out and rushed upon the thrower of inkstones to smite him.
Meanwhile Jokey Jin had found a bamboo pole which he flailed around him: a
terrible weapon in so confined and crowded a space. Soon Tealeaf had sustained a
blow from it and was bawling for reinforcements from outside. There were three
other pages in attendance on Bao-yu besides himself, all equally inclined to mischief.
Their names were Sweeper, Ploughboy and Inky. With a great shout of ‘To arms! To
arms! Down with the bastards!’ these three now came rushing like angry hornets
into the classroom, Inky wielding a door-bar which he had picked up and Sweeper
and Ploughboy brandishing horsewhips.
Jia Rui, in a frenzy of outraged authority, hopped from one to the other, alternately
grabbing and cajoling, but none would take the slightest bit of notice. Disorder was
now general. The more mischievous of the scholars mingled glee-fully in the fray, safe,
in the general scrimmage, to land punches at chosen foes without fear of discovery
or reprisal. The more timid crawled into places of safety. Others stood on their desks,
laughing and clapping their hands and cheering on the combatants. The classroom
was like a cauldron of still water that had suddenly come to the boil.
Li Gui and the other older servants, hearing the uproar from outside, now hurried in,
and by concerted shouting eventually managed to call the boys to a halt. Li Gui asked
them what they were fighting about. He was answered by a medley of voices, some
saying one thing and some another. Unable to make sense of what he heard, he
turned his attention to Tealeaf and the other pages, cursing them roundly and
turning them out of the room.
Qin Zhong had fallen an early victim to Jokey Jin’s pole, sustaining a nasty graze on
the head which Bao-yu was at this very moment mopping with the flap of his gown.
Seeing that Li Gui had succeeded in restoring some kind of order, he asked to be
taken away.
‘Pack up my books, Li Gui, and fetch the horse, will you? I am going to tell
Great-uncle Dai-ru about this. We were shamefully insulted, and because we didn’t
want to start a quarrel, we went along in a perfectly polite and reasonable manner
and reported the matter to Cousin Rui. But instead of doing anything about it, he
gave us a telling-off, stood by while someone called us filthy names, and actually
encouraged them to start hitting us. Naturally Tealeaf stuck up for us when he saw
we were being bullied. What would you expect him to do? But they all ganged up on
him and started hitting him, and even Qin Zhong’s head was cut open. We can’t go
on studying here after this.’
Li Gui tried to calm him.
‘Don’t be hasty, young master! Your great-uncle has gone home on business and if
we go running after him to pester him about a little thing like this, he’ll think we
don’t know how to behave. If you want my advice, the proper way to settle this affair
is by dealing with it here, where it started. Not by rushing off and upsetting your poor
old uncle.’ He turned to Jia Rui. ‘This is all your fault, Mr Rui, sir. While your granfer is
away you are the head of the whole school and everyone looks to you to set an
example. If anyone does anything they shouldn’t, it’s up to you to deal with it—give
them a hiding, or whatever it is they need. Not sit by and let matters get out of hand
to this extent.’
‘I did tell them to stop,’ said Jia Rui, ‘but they wouldn’t listen.’
‘If you don’t mind my saying so,’ said Li Gui, ‘it’s because you’ve been to blame
yourself on past occasions that these lads won’t do what you tell them to now. So if
this business today does get to the ears of your grandfather, you’ll be in trouble
yourself, along of all the rest. If I were you, sir, I should think of some way of sorting
this out as quickly as possible.’
‘Sort it out nothing!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m definitely going to report this.’
‘If Jokey Jin stays here,’ wailed Qin Zhong tearfully, ‘I’m not studying in this school
any longer.’
‘There is no earthly reason to talk about leaving this school,’ said Bao-yu. ‘We have
as much right to come here as anyone else. When I’ve explained to everyone exactly
what happened, Jokey Jin will be expelled.
‘Who is this Jokey Jin, any way?’ he asked Li Gui.
Li Gui thought for a moment.
‘Better not ask. If I told you, it would only make for more unpleasantness.’
Tealeaf’s voice piped up from outside the window:
‘He’s the nephew of Mrs Huang on the Ning-guo side. Trash like that trying to scare
us! I know your Auntie Huang, Jokey Jin! She’s an old scrounger. I’ve seen her down
on her knees in front of our Mrs Lian, begging for stuff so that she could go out and
pawn it. What an aunt! I’d be ashamed to own an aunt like that!’
Li Gui shouted at him furiously.
‘Detestable little varmint! Trust you to know the answer and spread your poison!’
Bao-yu sniffed contemptuously.
‘So that’s who he is! The nephew of Cousin Huang’s wife. I’ll go and speak to her
about this.’
He wanted to go straight away, and called to Tealeaf to come inside and pack up his
books.
‘No need for you to go, Master Bao,’ said Tealeaf as he swaggered in triumphantly
to do his bidding. ‘Let me go for you and save you the trouble. I’ll just say that Lady
Jia wants a word with her, hire a carriage, and bring her along myself. Then you can
question her in front of Lady Jia.’
Li Gui was furious.
‘Do you want to die? If you’re not careful, my lad, when we get home I’ll first thrash
the living daylights out of you and then tell Sir Zheng and Lady Wang that Master Bao
was put up to all this by your provocation. I’ve had trouble enough as it is trying to
get these lads calmed down a bit without needing any fresh trouble from you. It was
all of your making, this rumpus, in the first place. But instead of thinking about ways
of damping it down, you have to go throwing more fat on the fire.’
After this outburst Tealeaf was at last silent.
Jia Rui was by now terrified lest the matter should go any further and his own far
from clean record be brought to light. Fear made him abject. Addressing Qin Zhong
and Bao-yu in turn, ‘he humbly begged them not to report it. At first they were
adamant. Then Bao-yu made a condition:
‘All right, we won’t tell. But you must make Jokey Jin apologize.’
At first Jokey Jin refused, but Jia Rui was insistent, and Li Gui added his own
persuasion:
‘After all, it started with you, so if you don’t do what they say, how are we ever
going to end it?’
Under their combined pressure Jokey Jin’s resistance at last gave way and he locked
hands and made Qin Zhong a bow. But Bao-yu said this was not enough. He insisted
on a kotow. Jia Rui, whose only concern now was to get the matter over with as
quickly as possible, quietly urged him to comply:
‘You know what the proverb says:
He who can check the moment’s rage
Shall calm and carefree end his days.’
Did Jokey Jin comply? The following chapter will reveal.
CHAPTER 10
Widow Jin’s self-iinterest gets the better of her
righteous indignation
And Doctor Zhang’s diagnosis reveals the origin
of a puzzling disease



Outnumbered, and hard pressed by Jia Rui to apologize, Jokey Jin made a kotow to
Qin Zhong, whereupon Bao-yu agreed to let the matter drop. Back in his own home,
when school was over, he brooded with mounting anger on his humiliation.
‘Qin Zhong is Jia Rong’s brother-in-law: it’s not as if he were one of the Jia clan. He’s
only an external scholar, the same as me; and it’s only because he is friends with
Bao-yu that he can afford to be so high and mighty. Well, in that case he ought to
behave himself, then no one would have any cause to complain. But he’s always
carrying on in such a sneaky, underhand way with Bao-yu, as though he thought the
rest of us were all blind and couldn’t see what he was up to. And now today he’s
started making up to someone else and I happen to have found him out. So what if
there were a row about this? I’ve got nothing to be afraid of.’
His mother, Widow Jin, overheard his muttering.
‘What have you been getting up to this time ?’ she asked. ‘Look at the job we had
getting you into that school. All the talks I had with your aunt and the trouble she
went to to see Mrs Lian about it. Suppose we hadn’t had their help in getting you in
there, we could never have afforded a tutor. What’s more, you get free tea and free
dinners there, don’t you? That has meant a big saving for us during the two years you
have been going there. And you’re glad enough to have some?thing decent to wear
out of the money saved, aren’t you? And another thing. If you hadn’t been going to
that school, how would you ever have met that Mr Xue of yours? Between seventy
and eighty taels of silver we’ve had out of him during this past year. I can tell you this,
my boy. If you get yourself thrown out of there, you needn’t think you can get in
anywhere else, because you could easier fly to the moon than find another place like
that. Now you just play quietly for a bit and then go to bed like a good boy!’
Thus admonished, Jokey Jin swallowed his anger and fell silent. Before long he went
to bed and to sleep, and next day was back at the school again as usual. Of him no
more.



*
Jokey Jin’s aunt was married to one Jia Huang, a member of the Jia clan in the same
generation as Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian. It goes without saying, of course, that not all
members of the clan lived in the sort of style maintained by the Ning and Rong
households. Jia Huang and his wife had only the income from a very small property
to live on, and it was only by dint of frequent visits to the Ning and Rong mansions,
where their flattering attentions on Wang Xi-feng and You-shi earned them an
occasional subsidy, that they were able to make ends meet.
Today the weather was fine and sunny and Mrs Huang had nothing particular to do at
home, so taking an old serving-woman with her, she got into a cab and went off to
pay a call on her sister-in-law and nephew.
In the course of conversation Widow Jin soon got on to the subject of yesterday’s
affair in the schoolroom and launched into a full account, from which no detail was
omitted, of all those happenings. It would have been as well for her if she had not
done so, for the effect was to kindle a dangerous anger in the bosom of her
sister-in-law.
‘That little beast Qin Zhong!’ said Mrs Huang. ‘He may be related to the Jias, by
marriage, but then so is your boy. What business has he to go throwing his weight
about like that, I should like to know? Especially after the disgusting things he had
been doing himself. Considering what he’d been up to, even Bao-yu ought not to
have sided with him to that extent. Let me go and see Mrs Zhen about this. I shall ask
her to let me have it out with Qin Zhong’s sister and see if we can’t get some
satisfaction.’
‘Oh dear, I shouldn’t talk so much! I never meant to tell you this. Please, my dear, I
beg of you not to speak to them about it! Never mind the rights and wrongs of the
case, if this all gets out, they will make it too hot for my boy to stay on at the school;
and if he had to stop going to the school, we should never be able to afford a tutor
for him, quite apart from all the extra expense I should have of feeding him during
the day.’
‘Never mind about all that!’ said Mrs Huang. ‘We’ll worry about that after I’ve
spoken to them and seen what happens.’
Dismissing her sister-in-law’s entreaties, she sent the old servant-woman out for a
cab, and getting inside, drove straight off to the Ning-guo mansion. But by the time
she had reached it, driven in at the east end gate, dismounted from the carriage and
gone in to see You-shi, the edge had already worn off her anger, and it was only after
deferential inquiries about the health and comfort of her hostess and various other
in-consequential matters that she got around to asking what had become of Qin-shi,
who was usually in evidence during her visits.
‘I don’t know what’s the matter with her lately,’ said You?-shi. ‘It’s been more than
two months now since she had a period, yet the doctors say she isn’t pregnant. And
during the last few days she’s been getting so tired and listless in the afternoons:
doesn’t feel like doing anything; doesn’t even feel like talking; all the spirit seems to
have gone out of her. I’ve said to her, “Never mind about wifely duties. Just forget
about the morning and evening visits and concentrate on getting better. Even when
relations call,” I said, “I can see to them myself. And never mind what the older
members of the family might say: I’ll do all the explaining for you.” I’ve spoken to
Rong, as well. “You’re not to tire her out,” I told him, “and you’re not to let her get
upset! She must just rest quietly for a few days and look after herself. And if there’s
anything she fancies to eat, just come to my apartment to get it. Because if anything
should happen to her,” I said, “you wouldn’t find another wife like that, with her
looks and her good nature, if you took a lantern to look for her.” She’s such a sweet
person, there isn’t anyone among our relations or among the older members of the
family who doesn’t love her. I’ve been so worried on her account these last few days.
And just to make matters worse, first thing this morning her young brother comes
along—Silly little boy! he ought to have realized that his sister wasn’t well and not in
a condition to listen to such things, even if he’d suffered ten thousand times the
injustice!—It seems that yesterday there was a fight at the school. One of the
external students—I don’t know which one it was—had been bullying him; and there
were a lot of other very nasty things as well. So he had to go and tell all this to his
sister. Well, you know how sensitive she is, my dear, in spite of the fact that she
always seems so lively and full of fun to talk to. The slightest little thing can upset her
and set her brooding on it for whole days and nights together. In fact, this illness has
been brought on by too much worrying, I’m sure of it. Well, this morning when she
heard that someone had been bullying her brother, it both upset her and at the same
time made her angry. She was upset to think that those horrible boys at the school
should be able to twist things round and say such ter?rible things about him, but she
was also angry with him, because she said he must have been getting into bad ways
and not giving his mind properly to his studies to have got into trouble of this sort in
the first place. So of course, because of this upset she wouldn’t have any breakfast.
I’ve just been round there trying to calm her. I gave her brother a talking-to and sent
him round to see Bao-yu, and I stood over her while she ate half a bowlful of
bird’s-nest soup. I’ve only just this minute got back. Oh, I’m so worried about her, my
dear! We haven’t got a good doctor at the moment, either. It pierces me to the heart
when I think about that child’s illness! I suppose you don’t happen to know of a good
doctor, do you?’
Mrs Huang’s determination to have things out with Qin-shi, of which she had boasted
so valiantly at her sister-in-law’s, had, in the course of this outpouring, fled to the far
kingdom of Java. She hastened to own that she knew of no good doctor.
‘But hearing what you have said about this illness,’ she added, ‘I can’t help
wondering if it may not after all be preg?nancy. You want to be careful they don’t
give her the wrong treatment. If they give her the wrong treatment for that, there
will be real trouble!’
‘I know,’ said You-shi. ‘That’s what I say.’
While they were still talking, Cousin Zhen came in from outside. ‘Isn’t this Cousin
Huang’s wife?’ he asked You-shi, catching sight of the visitor. Mrs Huang dropped him
a curtsey and a ‘how-do-you-do’. ‘You must ask our cousin to dinner,’ he said, going
on into the room beyond.
The original object of Mrs Huang’s visit had of course been to complain to Qin-shi
about Qin Zhong’s treatment of her nephew. Hearing of Qin-shi’s illness she had
abandoned all thought of even mentioning the subject; and now that Cousin Zhen
and You-shi were being so nice to her, her anger grad?ually gave way to pleasure, and
after gossiping a while longer she went off home.
When she had gone, Cousin Zhen came in again and sat down.
‘What did she come about today?’ he asked You-shi.
‘Oh,’ said You-shi, ‘nothing in particular. When she first came in she appeared to be
upset about something or other, then after we’d been talking for some time and I
mentioned that Rong’s wife was ill, she gradually calmed down. When you invited her
to dinner she knew she couldn’t very well stay on with sickness in the house and left
after chatting a few minutes longer. She didn’t ask for anything before she went.
     ‘But let’s talk about that child’s illness. The thing is, you really must find a good
doctor to look at her, before it gets too late. This lot we have around the house at
present are com?pletely useless! Each one of them just listens to what you say and
then gives it back to you with a few learned words thrown in. And they’re so terribly
conscientious about it! We have three or four of them coming by turns every day,
and some?times they’ll take her pulse four or five times in the same day. Then they
have long discussions while they decide on a prescription. None of the medicine does
her any good, and the only consequence of all this is that she is having to change her
clothes four or five times in a day and be constantly getting up and sitting down to
see these doctors, which is no good at all for a person in her condition.’
     ‘Oh, she’s a silly child!’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘There’s no need for all this dressing
and undressing. Suppose she caught a chill on top of this other illness, that would be
really frightful. Never mind about the clothes, for goodness’ sake, however good they
are! It’s the child’s health that matters. Who cares if she has to have a completely
new outfit every day? We can afford it.
‘What I was going to tell you is that I’ve just had a visit from Feng Zi-ying. He
noticed that something was bothering me, and when he asked me what it was I
explained that our daughter-in-law isn’t well and told him how worried we are
because we haven’t got a decent doctor who can tell us for sure whether it’s
pregnancy or disease, so that we don’t even know how serious it is. Then Feng
Zi-ying told me about a scholar friend of his called Zhang You-shi. He and Feng were
at school together. He is a man of very wide learning including, apparently, an
excellent knowledge of medicine and the ability to tell with certainty whether a
disease is curable or not. He’s up at the capital this year to purchase a place for his
son and is at present staying in Feng Zi-ying’s house. It looks as if in his hands she
might stand a good chance of getting better. Anyway, I’ve already sent someone
round with my card and and asked him to call. It’s getting a bit late for him to come
today, but he should definitely be round tomorrow. Feng Zi-ying promised to see him
when he got back and put in a word for me to make quite sure that he agrees to
come. So we’ll just have to wait and see what this Dr Zhang says.’
You-shi was delighted with this news.
‘And what are we going to do about Father’s birthday?’ she asked. ‘It’s the day
after tomorrow.’
‘I’ve just been out to see him,’ said Cousin Zhen, ‘and I took the opportunity while I
was there of asking him if he would come over on his birthday to receive everyone’s
kowtows, but he refused. He said, “I’ve got used to the peace and quiet of the
monastery and I’m not willing to go back into your quarrelsome world again. If you
insist on celebrating my birthday it would be a hundred times better to have my tract
on Divine Rewards written out by a good calligrapher and cut on blocks for printing
than to drag me back to your house for a lot of senseless head-knocking.” He said, “If
the family turn up tomorrow and the day after for my birthday, you can give them a
party yourself. But don’t go sending me any presents,” he said, “and don’t come
yourself! If it will set your mind at zest you can give me a kotow now and get it over
with. But if you come round here the day after tomorrow with a lot of other people
to pester me, I shall refuse to see you.” Well, after that I obviously can’t go again on
his birthday. We’d better have Lai Sheng in and make arrangements for two days’
entertainment.’
You-shi called in Jia Rong.
‘Tell Lal Sheng to prepare the usual two-day party for Grandfather,’ she said. ‘Say
we want a really good spread. We shall be asking Lady Jia.and Sir Zheng and Lady
Wang and your Auntie Lian from the other house: you can go round yourself to invite
them.
‘And by the way: today your father heard of a good doctor and has already sent
someone to ask him round. He should be coming tomorrow. When he does, you had
better tell him exactly what your wife’s symptoms have been during the past few
days.’
Jia Rong promised to carry out his mother’s instructions and left the room,
encountering, as he did so, the youth who had been sent to Feng Zi-ying’s house to
request a call from the doctor. He had just got back from delivering his message and
reported to Jia Rong as follows:
‘I took the Master’s card to the doctor at Mr Feng’s house and asked him to call. He
said Mr Feng had already spoken to him about it, but he had been out visiting all day
and only just got back and he simply didn’t have the energy to go out any more today.
He said, “Even if I were to go round to your house now I shouldn’t be able to take the
young lady’s pulse. It would take me all night to get my breathing regulated.
However,” he said, “I shall definitely call round tomorrow.” And he said, “My
knowledge of medicine is really too slight for a consultation of this importance, but
as your master and Mr Feng are so pressing, I obviously cannot refuse. But I hope you
will explain this to your master.” And he said, “As for your master’s card, that is an
honour I really cannot accept”; and he made me bring it back. Will you please pass
on this message for me, Master Rong?’
Jia Rong turned and went back into the room to tell his parents. Going out once more,
he summoned Lai Sheng and gave instructions for preparing a two-day birthday party,
which Lai Sheng duly proceeded to put into operation. But of that no more.
About noon next day one of the servants at the gate came in to report:
‘The Dr Zhang you sent for has arrived, sir’.
Cousin Zhen went out to receive the doctor and con?ducted him into the main
reception room, where they both sat down. He waited until the doctor had taken tea
before broaching the subject of his visit.
‘Yesterday Mr Feng was telling me about your great learning,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘I
gather that it includes a pro?found knowledge of medicine. I assure you I was very
much impressed.’
‘I am only a very indifferent scholar,’ replied Dr Zhang, ‘and my knowledge is really
extremely superficial. However, Mr Feng was telling me yesterday of the courteous
and con?siderate patronage of scholars which is traditional in your family, so when I
received your summons I felt unable to refuse. I must insist, though, that I am
entirely lacking in real learning and am acutely embarrassed to think that this will all
too soon become apparent.’
‘My dear sir, you are altogether too modest,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘Do you think I
could ask you to go in now and have a look at my daughter-in-law? We are relying on
your superior knowledge to put us out of our uncertainty.’
He left the doctor in the charge of Jia Rong, who conducted him through the inner
part of the house to his own apartment, where Qin-shi was.
‘Is this the lady?’ asked the doctor.
‘Yes, this is my wife,’ Jia Rong replied. ‘Do sit down! I ex?pect you would like me to
describe her symptoms first, before you take the pulse?’
‘If you will permit me, no,’ said the doctor. ‘I think it would be better if I took the
pulse first and asked you about the development of the illness afterwards. This is the
first time .I have been to your house, and as I am not a skilled practitioner and have
only come here at our friend Mr Feng’s insistence, I think I should take the pulse and
give you my diagnosis first. We can go on to talk about her symptoms and discuss a
course of treatment if you are satisfied with the diagnosis. And of course, it will still
be up to you to decide whether or not the treatment I prescribe is to be followed.’
‘You speak with real authority, doctor,’ said Jia Rong. ‘I only wish we had got to hear
of you earlier. Take her pulse now, then, and let us know whether what she has can
be cured, so that my parents may be spared further anxiety.’
At this point Qin-shi’s women carried in a large arm-rest of the kind used in
consultations, propped her forward with her arms across it, and drew back her
sleeves, exposing both arms at the wrist. The doctor stretched out his hand and laid
it on her right wrist, then, having first regulated his own breathing in order to be able
to count the rate, he felt the pulses with great concentration for the space of several
minutes, after which he transferred to the left wrist and spent an equal amount of
time on that. This done, he proposed that they should withdraw to the outside room
to talk.
Jia Rong accompanied him outside and sat with him on the kang. An old woman
served tea, which Jia Rong invited the doctor to take, waiting until he had done so
before asking him for his diagnosis.
‘Tell me, doctor, from your reading of my wife’s pulse, do you think she can be
cured?’
‘Well, the lower left distal pulse is rapid and the lower left median pulse is strong
and full,’ said the doctor. ‘On the right side, the distal pulse is thin and lacks strength
and the median pulse is faint and lacks vitality.
‘Now, a rapid lower left-hand distal pulse means that a malfunction of the
controlling humour of the heart is causing it to generate too much fire; and the
strong lower median pulse means that the liver’s humour is blocked, giving rise to a
deficiency of blood. A thin, weak distal pulse on the right side indicates a gross
deficiency of humour in the lungs; and a faint right median pulse lacking in vitality
shows that the earth of the spleen is being subdued by the woody element of the
liver.
‘If the heart is generating fire, the symptoms should be ir?regularity of the menses
and insomnia. A deficiency of blood and blockage of humour in the liver would result
in pain and congestion under the ribs, delay of the menses beyond their term, and
burning sensations in the heart. A deficiency of humour in the lungs would give rise
to sudden attacks of giddiness, sweating at five or six in the morning, and a sinking
feeling rather like the feeling you get in a pitching boat. And if the earth of the spleen
is being subdued by the wood of the liver, she would undoubtedly experience loss of
appetite, lassitude, and general enfeeblement of the whole body. If my reading of the
lady’s pulse is correct, she ought to be showing all these symptoms. Some people
would tell you they indicated a pregnancy, but I am afraid I should have to disagree.’
‘You must have second sight, doctor!’ said one of the old women, a body-servant of
Qin-shi’s who was standing by. ‘What you have said exactly describes how it is with
her; there is no need for us to tell you anything more. Of all the doctors we’ve lately
had around here to look at her none has ever spoken as much to the point as this.
Some have said she’s expecting; others have said it’s illness; one says it’s not serious;
another only gives her till the winter solstice; not one of them tells you anything you
can really rely on. Please doctor, you tell us: just how serious is this illness ?’
‘I am afraid my colleagues have allowed your mistress’s condition to deteriorate,’
said the doctor. ‘If she had been given proper treatment at the very beginning, when
she first started her courses, there is every reason to suppose that she would by now
be completely cured. But the illness has been neglected for so long now, this
breakdown was almost bound to happen. I would say that with proper treatment she
has about a one in three chance of recovery. We shall just have to see how she
responds to my medicine. If, after taking it, she can get a good night’s sleep, her
chances will be distinctly better: say fifty?-fifty.
‘From my reading of her pulse, I should expect your mistress to be a very highly
strung, sensitive young woman. Sometimes, when people are over-sensitive, they
find a good deal that is upsetting in what goes on around them; and of course, if
things are upsetting them, they will tend to worry a lot. This illness has been caused
by too much worry affecting the spleen and causing an excess of wood in the liver,
with the result that the menstrual blood has been prevented from flowing at the
proper times. If we were to ask your mistress about the dates of her courses, I am
sure we should find that they tended to be on the late side, isn’t that so?’
‘Absolutely right,’ the old woman replied. ‘Her periods have never been early.
Sometimes two or three days late, sometimes as much as ten days: but in any case,
always late.’
‘You see!’ said the doctor. ‘There is the cause of the trouble. If she could have been
treated in time with something to fortify the heart and stabilize the humours, she
would never have got into this present state. What we have now, I am afraid, is an
advanced case of dehydration. Well, we shall have to see what my medicine can do
for her.’
He wrote out the following prescription and handed it to Jia Rong:

For a decoction to increase the breath, nourish the heart, fortify the spleen and calm
the liver

R
    Ginseng 2 drams
    Atractylis (clay-baked)    2 drams
    Lycoperdon 3 drams
    Nipplewort (processed) 4 drams
    Angelica 2 drams
    White peony root       2 drams
    Hemlock parsley 1? drams
    Yellow vetch root3 drams
    Ground root of nutgrass 2 drams
    Hate’s ear (in vinegar)    ? dram
    Huaiqing yam 2 drams
    Dong E ass’s glue (prepn with powdered oyster-shell)    2 drams
    Corydalis (cooked in wine) 1? drams
    Roast liquorice ? dram
Adjuvant: Excoriate and remove pits from 7 lotus-seeds;
Item 2 large jujubes.
‘Most impressive!’ said Jia Rong, glancing at the pre?scription. ‘Tell me, though,
doctor: just how serious is this illness? Is her life in danger?’
The doctor smiled. ‘You are an intelligent young man, Mr Jia. When an illness has
reached this stage, it is not going to be cured in an afternoon. We must see how she
responds to medication. As I see it, there is no real danger this winter. I should say
that if she can get past the spring equinox, you could look forward to a complete
recovery.’
Jia Rong was intelligent enough to understand the real import of what the doctor was
telling him and did not question him further. Having first seen him out, he went in to
show the prescription and written summary of the diagnosis to Cousin Zhen and gave
both his parents a full account of what the doctor had said.
‘No other doctor has ever spoken so convincingly,’ said You-shi, turning to Cousin
Zhen. ‘I am sure his medicine will do her good.’
Cousin Zhen smiled complacently.
‘This man is no medical hack practising for a living,’ he said. ‘It’s only because Feng
Zi-ying is such a good friend of mine that he could be persuaded to come and see us.
Perhaps with a man like this treating her our daughter-in-law stands some chance of
getting better. I see there is ginseng in that prescription, by the way. You can use
some of that pound of high-grade ginseng we bought the other day.’
     Seeing that they had no more to say, Jia Rong went out and ordered the drugs
for Qin-shi’s medicine to be purchased and prepared. But you will have to read the
next chapter if you want to know what effect the medicine had on her when she had
taken it.
CHAPTER 11

Ning-guo House celebrates the birthday
of an absent member
And Jia Rui conceives an illicit passion
for his attractive cousin

Jia Jing’s birthday had now arrived. Cousin Zhen packed sixteen lacquer gift-boxes
with the rarest and choicest deli?cacies and instructed Jia Rong to take a number of
domestics with him and deliver them to Jia Jing. He was to observe carefully whether
or not his grandfather was pleased, and having made his kotow, was to deliver the
following message:
‘Because of your request, Father has not ventured to visit you himself. Instead he
will place himself at the head of the entire family and lead them in prostrating
themselves in your direction.’
Having received his father’s instructions, Jia Rong mus?tered his band of servants and
set out.
Back at home visitors gradually began to arrive. Jia Lian and Jia Qiang were the first.
Having inspected the various seating arrangements, they inquired whether there was
to be entertainment of some kind.
‘The Master had originally been reckoning on old Sir Jing coming here today,’ said
one of the servants, ‘so he didn’t arrange for any entertainment. But the day before
yesterday he learned that Sir Jing would not be coming, so he asked us to find a
troupe of actors and a band. They are at present on the stage in the garden getting
ready for the performance.’
Lady Xing, Lady Wang, Wang Xi-feng and Bao-yu arrived next and were welcomed
and conducted inside by Cousin Zhen and You-shi. You-shi’s mother was already there.
She was introduced to the new arrivals, who were then invited to sit down and were
served by Cousin Zhen and You-shi with tea.
‘We realize,’ said Cousin Zhen, ‘that Lady Jia is a generation older than Father.
Father is only her nephew, of course, and strictly speaking it wasn’t correct form to
invite a person of her age at all. Nevertheless, since the weather is so fresh and nice
just now and the chrysanthemums in the garden at their best, we had rather hoped
that she might enjoy coming over for a bit and having all her children and
grandchildren around her. That was our only motive in asking her. I’m sorry she
decided not to honour us.’
‘Up to yesterday,’ Xi-feng put in hurriedly, not waiting for Lady Wang to reply,
‘Grandmother had been intending to come. Then yesterday evening she saw Bao-yu
eating some peaches and the greedy old thing couldn’t resist trying one herself. She
only ate about two thirds of a peach, but she had to get up twice running in the early
hours, and this morning she still felt rather poorly and told me to tell you that she
definitely wouldn’t be able to come. But she said that if you have any specially nice
things to eat she would like one or two kinds to try; only they must be soft and easy
to digest.’
Cousin Zhen smiled with pleasure.
‘Well, that’s all right then. Knowing how much Grandma enjoys a bit of fun, I
thought it didn’t seem like her not to come today unless she had some good reason
for not coming.’
‘The other day Xi-chun was telling us that Rong’s wife is not very well,’ said Lady
Wang. ‘What exactly is wrong with her?’
‘It’s a very puzzling illness,’ You-shi replied. ‘At Mid-Autumn last month, when she
got back from playing cards half the night with you and Lady Jia, she seemed
perfectly all right. But from the twentieth onwards she seemed to get more and
more tired and listless every day—too tired even to eat. She’s been like that for more
than a fortnight now, and it is two months since she had a period.’
‘Couldn’t she be expecting?’ said Lady Xing.
They were interrupted by a servant from outside:
‘Sir She and Sir Zheng and all the other gentlemen have arrived, sir. They are in the
main reception room.’
Cousin Zhen hurried out.
‘To begin with that’s what some of the doctors told us,’ said You-shi, resuming the
conversation; ‘but yesterday Feng Zi-ying introduced a doctor friend of his to us who
is terribly good, someone he went to school with, and he said that she wasn’t
expecting at all. He said she was suffering from a serious illness. He wrote a
prescription for her yesterday and she has already had one dose of the medicine.
Today her giddiness is a bit better, but everything else is still pretty much the same.’
‘There!’ said Xi-feng. ‘I thought it must be something quite serious to keep her
away, especially on a day like this. I know she would have forced herself to come if
she could have done.’
‘You remember you saw her here on the third,’ said You-shi. ‘She had a terrible
struggle to keep going on that occasion. It was only because the two of you have
always been so close and she didn’t want to miss you that she made the effort.’
Xi-feng’s eyes became moist and for a moment she was too overcome to speak.
‘I know “the weather and human life are both unpredic?table”,’ she said at last,
‘but she’s only a child still. If anything should happen to her as a result of this illness, I
think all the fun would go out of life!’
While she was speaking Jia Rong came in, and having greeted in turn first Lady Xing,
then Lady Wang, and then Xi-feng, he turned to his mother:
‘I’ve just delivered the food to Grandfather, and I told him that Father was
entertaining all the men of the family at home and had not presumed to visit him
because of what he said. Grandfather was very pleased. He said “That is exactly as it
should be.” He said I was to tell you and Father to see that my great-uncles and
great-aunts are properly looked after, and he told me that I was to look after my
uncles and aunts and cousins. He also said he wanted the blocks for Divine Rewards
to be cut as quickly as possible and ten thousand copies printed for free distribution.
I’ve already given this message to Father. Now I’ve got to hurry off again to look after
the gentlemen while they have their dinner.’
‘Rong, just a moment!’ said Xi-feng as he was going. ‘How is it really with your
wife?’
Jia Rong’s brows contracted in a worried frown.
‘She’s not at all well, Auntie. You’ll know what I mean when you see her presently.’
He left without saying any more.
‘Well, ladies!’ said You-shi. ‘Will you have dinner in here, or shall we eat in the
garden? There are some actors in the garden preparing an entertainment.’
‘In here would be all right, wouldn’t it?’ said Lady Wang with a glance in Lady Xing’s
direction.
You-shi at once gave orders to her women to serve. There was an answering cry from
outside the door and a great flurry of domestics each bustling about her own
contribution to the meal. In no time at all the table was laid and dinner ready. You-shi
made Lady Xing and Lady Wang sit at the head with her mother, while she, Xi-feng
and Bao-yu sat at the two sides.
Lady Xing and Lady Wang politely protested that they had come to offer birthday
felicitations, not to eat a birthday feast.
‘Yes,’ said Xi-feng. ‘After all these years of spiritual self-improvement, Uncle must by
now be practically an Immortal. And with Immortals, as we all know, “it’s the thought
that counts and not the ceremony”.’
The others all laughed.
You-shi’s mother, Lady Xing, Lady Wang and Xi-feng, having finished their meal,
rinsed out their mouths and washed their hands, had just announced their intention
of going into the garden, when Jia Rong came in with a message for his mother.
‘My great-uncles and all the other gentlemen have just finished their dinner.
Great-uncle She says he has business at home, and Great-uncle Zheng doesn’t like
plays because he says he can’t stand the noise; but all the others have gone with
Uncle Lian and Cousin Qiang to watch the players.
‘People have come with cards and birthday presents from the Prince of An-nan, the
Prince of Dong-ping, the Prince of Xi-ning, the Prince of Bei-jing, the Duke of
Zhen-guo and five others of the Niu clan and the Marquis of Zhong-jing and seven
others of the Shi clan. The presents have all been received at the counting-house.
They have been entered in the gift-book, and the people who brought them have
been issued with thank-you cards. They have also been tipped the usual amounts and
given a meal before leaving.
‘And Father says will you please bring the great-aunts and Grandmother You and
Auntie Feng to the garden now.’
‘Yes, we’ve finished too,’ said You-shi. We were about to come over when you
arrived.’
‘Aunt Wang,’ said Xi-feng, ‘may I go and see Rong’s wife first? I can go on to the
garden from there.’
‘Certainly. You ought to go,’ said Lady Wang. ‘In fact, we should all like to go with
you, but I am afraid it would be too much excitement for her. Please give her our
love.’
‘My dear,’ said You-shi, ‘I know she will always do any-thing you ask her to. See if
you can talk her into a more cheerful frame of mind. It would be such a relief to me if
you could. But join us in the garden as soon as you can!’
Bao-yu asked if he could go with Xi-feng to see Qin-shi.
‘Yes,’ said Lady Wang. ‘She is your nephew’s wife. I think you should. Just look in for
a moment, though, and then join the rest of us.’
Thereupon You-shi invited Lady Wang, Lady Xing and old Mrs You to accompany her
to the All-scents Garden, while Xi-feng and Bao-yu accompanied Jia Rong to Qin-shi’s
room.
Entering the door of the apartment, they tiptoed softly into the inner room. As soon
as she saw them, Qin-shi attempted to rise, but Xi-feng would not let her.
‘No, no, don’t get up!’ she said. ‘You will make yourself giddy.’
In two rapid strides she was at her side and holding her by the hand.
‘My dearest child! It’s only a few days since last I saw you, but look how thin you
have grown!’
She sat down beside her on the quilt on which she sat propped. Bao-yu, after
greeting her, sat in a chair opposite.
‘Pour out some tea,’ said Jia Rong. ‘Auntie Feng and Uncle Bao didn’t get any after
their dinner.’
Qin-shi grasped Xi-feng’s hand and forced a smile to her wan face.
‘It looks as though I wasn’t meant to be happy, Auntie!’ she said. ‘This is such a
lovely family to have married into. Rong’s parents treat me as if I were their own
daughter. Rong may be young, but he respects me, and I respect him; there has never
been a cross word between us. You, it goes without saying—but not only you, all the
older members of the family—have always been goodness itself to me. I did so want
to he worthy of all this kindness. But now this wretched illness has come along and
taken away the chance. Now I shall never be able to be a good daughter to Rong’s
parents; and however badly I want to, I shall never be able to repay any of the love
you have shown me. I have a feeling inside me, Auntie: I don’t think I am going to last
the year out.’
Bao-yu had been studying the ‘Spring Slumber’ painting on Qin-shi’s wall all this time
and re-reading the couplet by Qin Guan on the scrolls at each side of it:
The coldness of spring has imprisoned the soft buds in a wintry dream;
The fragrance of wine has intoxicated the beholder with imagined flower-scents.

As he did so, the memory returned of that earlier afternoon when he had slept in
that very same room and dreamed about the Land of Illusion. He was musing on the
contents of that dream when he suddenly became aware of the words that Qin-shi
was saying. They pierced his heart like the points of a thousand arrows. Great tears
welled up in his eyes and rolled down his cheeks. Xi-feng, seeing him, was herself
deeply affected; but fearing that the sight of his grief might make Qin-shi even more
distressed, whereas the declared purpose of their visit had been to cheer her up, she
rallied him lightly on his tears.
‘Don’t be such a baby, Bao-yu! It’s not really that serious: sick people always say
things like that. Besides, she’s still young, and when you are young you can shake an
illness off in no time at all. --- You mustn’t let yourself think such stupid things,’ she
said, turning to Qin-shi. ‘You’ll make yourself worse.’
‘If only she could get a bit of food inside her.’ said Jia Rong. ‘That’s her real trouble:
she won’t eat anything.’
‘Bao,’ said Xi-feng, ‘your mother told you not to stay long. If you’re going to be like
this, you will only upset her, and in any case I expect your mother is beginning to
wonder about you—You go on ahead with Uncle Bao,’ she said to Jia Rong. ‘I am
going to sit a little longer with your wife.’
     Jia Rong at once led Bao-yu away to join the others in the All-scents Garden,
while Xi-feng addressed some words of encouragement to Qin-shi, after which,
dropping her voice to a murmur, she engaged in a long and intimate conversation
with her, ignoring two or three messages from You-shi urging her to join the party. At
last she felt unable to stay any longer.
‘Look after yourself!’ she said. ‘I shall come again. I feel sure that you are meant to
get better. It can’t have been an accident that they found that doctor the other day;
and now that you’ve got him, there’s really nothing to worry about.’
Qin-shi smiled.
‘Even if he’s a miracle-man, Auntie, “death’s a sickness none can cure”, and I know
that it’s just a question of time now.’
‘If you will go on talking like that, how can you possibly get better?’ said Xi-feng. ‘If
only you would try to look on the bright side. Remember what the doctor said. He
said that if you weren’t being properly treated, next spring would be dangerous for
you. If this were a household which couldn’t afford things like ginseng for your
treatment, you might have something to worry about. But now they know that you
can be cured, there’s nothing Rong’s parents wouldn’t do and nothing they couldn’t
afford to do for you. Never mind two drams of ginseng a day; if you needed two
pounds a day, they would get it for you gladly. So do try and get better! I must go
over to the garden now.’
‘Forgive me for not being able to see you out, Auntie,’ said Qin-shi. ‘Please come
again when you are free. We’ll have a nice talk together, just the two of us.’
There were tears in Xi-feng’s eyes as she promised to come often, whenever she was
free. Then, followed by the women who had accompanied her from the Rong
mansion and a number of female domestics belonging to the Ning household, she
made her way round to one of the side gates leading into the gardens.
        Golden chrysanthemums covered the open spaces;
        Silvery willow-trees bordered the water’s margins.
    The little bridge arched its span over a storied stream;
    The winding path made its way into a fairy hill.
        Crystal rills tinkled amidst the rocks.
        A quickset hedge recalled preautumnal fragrances.
        Crimson leaves fluttered upon the boughs.
        A wintry copse described calligraphic traceries.
        In the cold wind’s more insistent blast
        The oriole’s cry could still be heard.
        In the late sun’s more infrequent warmth
        The cricket’s chirp a while revived.
        At the far south-east end
    Pavilions nestled in artificial mountains.
    On the near north-west side
    Verandahs brooded on circumjacent waters.
    Music of little organs playing in the summer-house
    Increased the melancholy in the air.
    Glimpses of women’s dresses flitting through the little wood
    Enhanced the delicacy of the scene.

Xi-feng was making her way through the garden, admiring the view as she went,
when a figure suddenly stepped out from behind an artificial hill of rock and made its
way towards her:
‘How are you, cousin?’
Xi-feng gave a start of surprise and retreated a step.
‘Isn’t it Cousin Rui?’
‘Don’t you even know who I am, cousin?’
‘It isn’t that I don’t know you,’ said Xi-feng, ‘but you did come up rather suddenly
and I wasn’t expecting to see you here.’
‘We must have been fated to meet, cousin,’ said Jia Rui. ‘I had just slipped away
from the party to take a little stroll in these peaceful surroundings. I never expected
to meet my fair cousin here, but lo! So there must be a bond.’
He ogled her as he spoke with a fixed and meaningful stare.
Xi-feng’s sharp intelligence enabled her to penetrate without much difficulty the little
game he was playing, and feigning an interest she did not feel, she answered him
with a smile.
‘I can see why Lian is always speaking so highly of you. From seeing you today and
just hearing you speak those few words I can tell at once that you are an intelligent,
good-natured sort of person. At the moment I’m on my way to join my aunts, and I’m
afraid that I can’t stay and talk to you. Perhaps we could meet some other time when
we are both free?’
      ‘I should like to call on you when you are at home,’ said Jia Rui, ‘but I suppose a
young person like your good self is not in a position to receive visitors of the other
sex.’
      Xi-feng feigned a laugh.
      ‘We’re all one family—all one flesh and blood. I don’t see that age comes into it.’
      Jia Rui was secretly delighted by this encouragement.
      ‘I never dreamed today would bring a chance like this my way,’ he thought, and
the goatish eagerness of his expression grew even more repellent.
      ‘You had better hurry back to the party,’ said Xi-feng. ‘If they catch you playing
truant, you will find yourself being sconced!’
      Jia Rui was by now scarcely in command of his own person. Slowly, very slowly
he walked away, frequently turning back to gaze at Xi-feng as he did so. Xi-feng
mischievously pro?voked him by deliberately slowing down the pace of her own
progress through the garden.
     ‘What an odious creature!’ she thought to herself when there was some distance
between them. ‘Appearances certainly are deceptive! Who would have guessed he
was that sort of person? Well, if he is, he had better look out! One of these days I’ll
settle his hash for him; then perhaps he will realize what sort of person he is up
against!’
     Xi-feng had resumed a normal pace and had just skirted the foot of a little hill,
when she saw two or three old serving-women hurrying towards her in a state of
great agitation.
     ‘Oh, Mrs Lian,’ said one of the old women with a smile, when they caught sight
of her, ‘our mistress has been getting into such a state because you didn’t come!
She’s sent us to fetch you.’
    ‘Just like your mistress!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Always in a lather about something or
other!’ and she sauntered on quite un?concernedly, talking to the old woman as she
went.
    ‘How many pieces have they done so far?’
    ‘Eight or nine,’ the old woman replied.
    By this time they had arrived at the rear entrance of the two-storey Celestial
Fragrance Pavilion, where they found Bao-yu playing with a group of maids.
    ‘Mind you don’t make a nuisance of yourself, Bao,’ said Xi-feng.
    ‘Lady Xing and Lady Wang are sitting upstairs watching,’ said one of the maids.
‘You can get up there from this side, madam.’
    Lifting up her skirts, Xi-feng climbed slowly up the stairs. She found You-shi
standing at the top waiting for her.
    ‘You are an affectionate pair!’ said You-shi with a smile. ‘Once the two of you
meet, there’s no separating you. Tomorrow you had better move in with her and set
up house together! Come on, sit down! I’m going to drink a cup of wine with you!’
    Xi-feng asked her two aunts for permission to sit. When she had done so You-shi
held out the playbill and invited her to make a choice.
    ‘It’s not for me to choose when Mother and Aunt Wang are here,’ said Xi-feng.
    ‘Go ahead and choose!’ said Lady Xing. ‘Mrs You and your aunt and I have
already chosen a number of plays. Now you pick out one or two good ones for us!’
    Xi-feng politely rose to thank her, and taking the playbill from You-shi, scanned it
through and picked out two of the items listed: one a scene from The Return of the
Soul and the other ‘Gai-nian Plays His Guitar’ from The Palace of Eternal Youth.
    ‘If they do these two after they have finished singing this scene from Faithful
Bi-lian,’ she said, handing the playbill back to You-shi, ‘I think that will be just about
enough for the day.’
      ‘I’m sure it will,’ said Lady Wang. ‘We ought in any case to break up early, so that
our hosts can get a good night’s rest. They have had a lot on their minds lately.’
      ‘It isn’t often that you both come to see us,’ said You-shi.
      ‘Please stay as long as you can. It will be so much more fun. It’s really quite early
yet.’
‘Where have all the gentlemen gone to?’ inquired Xi-feng, who had got up from her
seat and was peering down into the lower storey.
‘They have gone off to the Frozen Sunlight Gallery to drink,’ said one of the old
women in attendance. ‘They left only a moment ago. They’ve taken the band with
them.’
‘What was wrong with this place?’ said Xi-feng, ‘Heaven knows what they can be
getting up to behind our backs!’
‘We can’t all be as strait-laced as you are,’ said You-shi with a laugh.
As they laughed and chattered together, the actors even?tually finished performing
the second of the two pieces Xi?-feng had selected, whereupon the wine was
removed from the tables and rice served. When they had finished their meal, the
company retired to the main reception room indoors and took tea there, after which
carriages were called for and the other ladies took their leave of old Mrs You. You-shi
stood at the head of all the concubines and female domestics of the Ning household
to see them outside, while Cousin Zhen at the head of the junior male members of
his family stood beside the waiting carriages.
‘You must come again tomorrow, ladies,’ said Cousin Zhen to Lady Xing and Lady
Wang as they emerged from the house.
‘I think not,’ said Lady Wang. ‘We have sat here the whole day being entertained
and we are all rather tired now. I think tomorrow we should like a rest.’
Jia Rui was staring fixedly at Xi-feng throughout this exchange.
After Cousin Zhen had gone indoors again, Li Gui led out a horse and Bao-yu
mounted on its back and rode off behind Lady Wang’s carriage. Cousin Zhen and the
other males then sat down to supper and, when it was over, the party broke up. Next
day there was another day of feasting for the members of the clan, particulars of
which, however, we omit from our record. We shall confine ourselves to observing
that from that day on Xi-feng paid frequent calls on Qin-shi. Sometimes her illness
seemed slightly better for a day or two, sometimes it seemed slightly worse. Cousin
Zhen, You-shi and Jia Rong were acutely worried.

*
Jia Rui made several visits to the Rong mansion, but all his calls seemed to coincide
with Xi-feng’s visits to the Ning mansion to see Qin-shi.
The thirtieth day of the eleventh month, the day of the winter solstice, arrived. It was
the turn of the season, and for several days before it Grandmother Jia, Lady Wang
and Xi-?feng had been sending messengers daily to inquire after Qin shi. Each time
the report they brought back was the same:
‘She hasn’t got any worse these last few days, but she doesn’t seem to be very
much better.’
‘At this time of year,’ said Lady Wang, ‘it’s a hopeful sign if an illness like hers
doesn’t get any worse.’
‘Oh I do hope so!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘That sweet child! If anything should
happen to her, it would break my heart.’
A wave of bitterness passed over her.
‘You and she have always been good friends,’ she said turning to Xi-feng.
‘Tomorrow is the “First of the Last”. Go and see her again some time after tomorrow.
Have a very careful look and try to find out exactly how she is. If she seems a bit
better, come and tell me when you get back. And if there is anything the dear child
has ever fancied eating in the past, see that she is kept constantly supplied with it.’
Xi-feng promised to do as she had said, and on the second day of the next month she
went over to the Ning-guo man?sion as soon as she had finished her breakfast.
Qin-shi’s sickness appeared to be no worse than previously, but the flesh on her face
and body was pitifully wasted. Xi-feng sat for a long time chatting with her, and once
more urged her to take a more optimistic view of her illness.
‘We shall know the worst when the spring comes,’ said Qin-shi. ‘At least I’ve got
past the solstice without anything happening, so perhaps I shall get better. Give
Grandma and Auntie Wang my regards, won’t you. I’ve eaten one or two bits of that
yam-cake with the date stuff inside that Grand?ma sent me yesterday. I found it quite
easy to digest.’
‘I’ll send you some more tomorrow,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Now I must go and see your
mother-in-law, and after that I have to hurry back and give my report on you to
Grandma.’
‘Give Grandma and Auntie Wang my love, Auntie.’
‘I will,’ said Xi-feng, and left her.
She went into You-shi’s reception room and sat down.
‘Tell me honestly,’ said You-shi. ‘What did you think of her?’
Xi-feng sat silent for some time with lowered head.
‘There’s no hope, is there? You’ll have to start getting things ready for the end. Of
course, it’s always possible that doing so may break the bad luck.’
‘I’ve already been quietly making a few preparations on the side,’ said You-shi. ‘The
only thing we haven’t yet got is the right timber {or the you know what. But we’re
looking round all the time.
Xi-feng had some tea and chatted a while longer with You-shi. Then she said:
‘I must hurry back to report to Grandma.’
‘Break it to her gently,’ said You-shi. ‘You don’t want to give her a shock, at her age.’
‘Of course,’ said Xi-feng, and rising to her feet went straight back home and called
on Grandmother Jia.
‘Rong’s wife asked me to give you her regards, Grandma. She sends you a kotow
and she says she feels somewhat better. She begs you not to worry about her. And
she says that when she’s made a bit more progress she’s going to come over to see
you and make you a kotow in person.’
‘How did you think she seemed?’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘For the time being there doesn’t seem to be anything much to worry about,’ said
Xi-feng. ‘She seems to be in quite good spirits.’
For a long time the old lady brooded in silence. Then, remembering Xi-feng, she told
her to change her clothes and rest a while.
Xi-feng said yes, she would, and after calling on Lady Wang, went back to her own
apartment, where Patience had warmed her everyday clothes for her to change into.
When she had changed, she sat down and asked Patience if anything had happened
during her absence.
‘Nothing, really,’ said Patience, handing her some tea. ‘Brightie’s wife came with
the interest on the three hundred taels of silver and I received it for you. Oh, and Mr
Rui sent someone to ask if you were in. He wants to pay you a call and talk about
something.’
Xi-feng snorted.
‘Horrible creature! he seems to be looking for trouble. Just let him come, then!’
‘What does Mr Rui want?’ asked Patience. ‘Why does he keep coming like this?’
In reply Xi-feng gave her a full account of her encounter with him in the garden of the
Ning-guo mansion and of the things he had said to her on that occasion,
‘What a nasty, disgusting man!’ said Patience. ‘A case of “the toad on the ground
wanting to eat the goose in the sky”. He’ll come to no good end, getting ideas like
that!’
‘Just wait till he comes! ‘ said Xi-feng. ‘I know how to deal with him.’
But if you wish to know the outcome of Jia Rui’s visit, you will have to read the next
chapter.

CHAPTER 12

Wang Xi-feng sets a trap for her admirer
And Jia Rui looks into the wrong side of the mirror



Jia Rui’s arrival was announced while Xi-feng and Patience were still talking about
him.
     ‘Ask him in,’ said Xi-feng.
     Hearing that he was to be received, Jia Rui rejoiced in?wardly. He came into the
room wreathed in smiles and over?whelmed Xi-feng with civilities. With feigned
solicitude she pressed him to be seated and to take tea. He became quite ecstatic at
the sight of her informal dress.
     ‘Why isn’t Cousin Lian back yet?’ he asked, staring with fascinated eyes.
‘I don’t know what the reason can be,’ said Xi-feng.
     ‘Could it be,’ Jia Rui inquired archly, ‘that Someone has detained him on his way
home and that he can’t tear himself away?’
     ‘Men are all the same!’ said Xi-feng. ‘They have only to set eyes on a woman to
begin another affair.’
     ‘Ah, there you are wrong!’ said Jia Rui. ‘I am not that sort of man.’
     ‘But how many men are there like you?’ said Xi-feng. ‘I doubt you could find one
in ten.’
     At this last remark Jia Rui positively scratched his ears with pleasure.
     ‘You must find it very dull here on your own every day,’ he said.
     ‘Yes, indeed!’ said Xi-feng. ‘If only there were someone who could come and talk
to me and help me to pass the time!’
     ‘Well,’ said Jia Rui, ‘I am always free. How would it be if I were to come every day
to help you pass the time?’
     ‘You must be joking!’ said Xi-feng. ‘What would you want to come here for?’
    ‘I mean every word I say,’ said Jia Rui. ‘May I be struck by lightning if I don’t! True,
there was a time when I should have been scared to come, because people always
told me what a holy terror you were and how dangerous it was to cross you; but now
I know that in reality you are all gentleness and fun, there is nothing that could stop
me coming. I would come now if it cost me my life.’
     ‘It’s true then,’ said Xi-feng, smiling delightedly. ‘You really are an understanding
sort of person --- so much more so than Rong or Qiang! I used to think that since they
were such handsome and cultured-looking young men they must be understanding
as well, but they turned out to be stupid brutes without the least consideration for
other people’s feelings.’
    This little speech went straight to Jia Rui’s heart, and un?consciously he began
edging his seat nearer to Xi-feng’s. He peered closely at an embroidered purse that
she was wearing and expressed a strong interest in one of her rings.
‘Take care!’ said Xi-feng in a low tone. ‘The servants might see you!’
    Obedient to his goddess’s command, Jia Rui quickly drew back again. Xi-feng
laughed.
‘You had better go!’
    ‘Ah no, cruel cousin! Let me stay a little longer!’
    ‘Even if you stay, it’s not very convenient here in broad daylight, with people
coming and going all the time. Go away now and come hack later when it’s dark, at
the beginning of the first watch. You can slip into the gallery west of this apart?ment
and wait for me there.’
    Jia Rui received these words like someone being presented with a rare and costly
jewel.
‘Are you sure you’re not joking ?’he asked hurriedly. ‘A lot of people must go
through that way. How should we avoid being seen?’
     ‘Don’t worry!’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ll give the watchmen a night off. When the side
gates are closed, no one else can get through.’
     Jia Rui was beside himself with delight and hurriedly took his leave, confident
that the fulfilment of all he wished for was now in sight. Having waited impatiently
for nightfall, he groped his way into the Rong-guo mansion just before they closed
the gates and slipped into the gallery, now totally deserted—as Xi-feng had promised
it would be—and black as pitch.
     The gate at the end of the alley-way opening on to Grand?mother Jia’s quarters
had already been barred on the outer side; only the gate at the east end remained
open. For a long time Jia Rui listened intently, but no one came. Suddenly there was a
loud slam and the gate at the east end, too, banged shut. Alarmed, but not daring to
make a sound, Jia Rui stealthily crept out and tried it. It was locked—as tight as a
bucket. Now even if he wanted to get out he could not, for the walls on either side of
the alley-way were too high to scale. Moreover the gallery was bare and draughty
and this was the midwinter season when the nights are long and the bitter north
wind seems to pierce into the very marrow of the bones. By the end of the night he
was almost dead with cold.
     When at last morning came, Jia Rui saw the gate at the east end open and an old
woman pass through to the gate opposite and call for someone to open up. Still
hugging himself against the cold, he sprinted out of the other gate while her back
was towards him. Fortunately no one was about at that early hour, and he was able
to slip out of the rear entrance of the mansion and run back home unseen.
     Jia Rui had lost both of his parents in infancy and had been brought up under the
sole guardianship of his grandfather Jia Dai-ru. Obsessed by the fear that once
outside the house his grandson might indulge in drinking and gambling to the
detriment of his studies, Dai-ru had subjected him since early youth to an iron
discipline from which not the slightest deviation was tolerated. Seeing him now
suddenly absent him?self a whole night from home, and being incapable, in his
wildest imaginings, of guessing what had really happened, he took it as a foregone
conclusion that he had been either drink?ing or gaming and had probably passed the
night in some house of prostitution --- a supposition which caused the old gentleman
to spend the whole night in a state of extreme choler.
     The prospect of facing his grandfather on arrival made Jia Rui sweat. A lie of
some sort was indispensable.
     ‘I went to see Uncle yesterday,’ he managed to say, ‘and as it was getting dark, he
asked me to stay the night.’
     ‘I have always told you that you are not to go out of that gate without first
informing me,’ said his grandfather. ‘Why then did you presume to go off on your
own yesterday without saying a word to anybody? That in itself would constitute
sufficient grounds for chastisement. But in addition to that you are lying!’
     Thereupon he, forced him to the ground, and, with the utmost savagery, dealt
him thirty or forty whacks with the bamboo, after which he forbade him to eat and
made him kneel in the open courtyard with a book in his hand until he had prepared
the equivalent of ten days’ homework.
     The exquisite torments suffered by Jia Rui, as he knelt with an empty stomach in
the draughty courtyard reciting his homework after having already been frozen all
night long and then beaten, can be imagined.
     Yet even now his infatuation remained unaltered. It never entered his mind that
he had been made a fool of. And so two days later, as soon as he had some free time,
he was back once more looking for Xi-feng. She deliberately reproached him for
having failed her, thereby so exasperating him that he swore by the most terrible
oaths that he had been faithful. Seeing him hurl himself so willingly into the net,
Xi-feng decided that a further lesson would be needed to cure him of his folly and
proposed another assignation.
     ‘Only tonight,’ she said, ‘don’t wait for me in that place again. Wait in the empty
room in the little passage-way behind this apartment. But mind you don’t run into
anybody.’
     ‘Do you really mean this?’ said Jia Rui.
     ‘If you don’t believe me, don’t come!’
     ‘I’ll come! I’ll come!’ said Jia Rui. ‘Whatever happens, I shall be there.’
      ‘Now I think you had better go.’
      Confident of seeing her again in the evening, Jia Rui went off uncomplainingly,
leaving Xi-feng time to muster her forces, brief her officers, and prepare the trap in
which the luckless man was to be caught.
      Jia Rui waited for the evening with great impatience. By a stroke of bad luck
some relations came on a visit and stayed to supper. It was already lamplight when
they left, and Jia Rui then had to wait for his grandfather to settle down for the night
before he could scuttle off to the Rong mansion and make his way to the room in the
little passage-way where Xi-feng had told him to go. He waited there for her arrival
with the frenzied agitation of an ant on a hot saucepan. Yet, though he waited and
waited, not a human shape appeared nor a human sound was heard, and he began
to be frightened and a little suspicious:
‘Surely she won’t fail me? Surely I shan’t be made to spend another night in the
cold...?’
As he was in the midst of these gloomy imaginings, a dark figure glided into the room.
Certain that it must be Xi-feng, Jia Rui cast all caution to the winds and, when the
figure approached him, threw himself upon it like a hungry tiger seizing its prey or a
cat pouncing on a harmless mouse.
‘My darling, how I have waited for you!” he exclaimed, enfolding his beloved in his
arms; and carrying her to the kang, he laid her down and began kissing her and
tugging at her trousers, murmuring ‘my sweetest darling’ and ‘my honey love’ and
other such endearments in between kisses. Throughout all of this not a single sound
was uttered by his partner. Jia Rui now tore down his own trousers and prepared to
thrust home his hard and throbbing member. Suddenly a light flashed --- and there
was Jia Qiang holding aloft a candle in a candlestick which he shone around:
‘Who is in this room?’
At this the person on the kang gave a giggle:
‘Uncle Rui is trying to bugger me!’
Horrors! The sight he saw when he looked down made Jia Rui want to sink into the
ground. It was Jia Rong! He turned to bolt, but Jia Qiang held him fast.
‘Oh no you don’t! Auntie Lian has already told Lady Wang that you have been
pestering her. She asked us to keep you here while she went to tell. When Lady Wang
first heard, she was so angry that she fainted, but now she’s come round again and is
asking for you to be brought to her. Come along, then! Off we go!’
At these words Jia Rui’s soul almost left its seat in his body.
‘My dear nephew, just tell her that you didn’t find me here!’ he said. ‘Tomorrow I
will reward you handsomely.’
‘I suppose I could let you go easily enough,’ said Jia Qiang. ‘The question is, how big
would this reward be? In any case, just saying that you will give me a reward is no
good. I should want a written guarantee.’
‘But I can’t put a thing like this down in writing!’
‘No problem there,’ said Jia Qiang. ‘Just say that you’ve lost money gambling and
have borrowed such and such an amount to cover your losses. That’s all you need
do.’
‘I could do that, certainly,’ said Jia Rui.
Jia Qiang at once disappeared and reappeared only a moment later with paper and a
writing-brush which had evidently been made ready in advance. Writing at his
dicta?tion Jia Rui was compelled, in spite of protests, to put down fifty taels of silver
as the amount on the IOU. The document, having been duly signed, was at once
pocketed by Jia Qiang, who then pretended to seek the connivance of Jia Rong. But
Jia Rong feigned the most obdurate incorruptibility and in?sisted that he would lay
the matter next day before a council of the whole clan and see that justice was done.
Jia Rui became quite frantic and kotowed to him. Finally, under pressure from Jia
Qiang and in return for another IOU for fifty taels of silver made out in his favour, he
allowed his scruples to be overcome.
‘You realize, don’t you,’ said Jia Qiang, ‘that I’m going to get into trouble for this?
Now let’s see. The gate leading to Lady Jia’s courtyard was bolted some time ago, and
Sir Zheng is at the moment in the main reception room looking at some stuff that has
just arrived from Nanking, so you can’t go through that way. The only way left would
be through the back gate. The trouble is, though, that if you leave now, you might
run into someone on the way, and then I should get into even worse trouble. You’d
better let me scout around a bit first and come for you when the coast is clear. In the
meantime you can t hide here, though, because they will shortly be com?ing in to
store the stuff from Nanking here. I’ll find somewhere else for you.’
He took Jia Rui by the arm, and having first blown the candle out, led him into the
courtyard and groped his way round to the underside of the steps which led up to
the terrace of the central building.
‘This hollow under the steps will do. Crouch down there, and don’t make a sound!
You can go when I come for you.
Jia Qiang and Jia Rong then went off leaving him to him?self.
Jia Rui, by now a mere automaton in the hands of his cap?tors, obediently crouched
down beneath the steps and was just beginning a series of calculations respecting his
present financial predicament when a sudden slosh! signalled the dis?charge of a
slop-pail’s stinking contents immediately above his head, drenching him from top to
toe with liquid filth and causing him to cry out in dismay --- but only momentarily, for
the excrement covered his face and head and caused him to close his mouth again in
a hurry and crouch silent and shivering in the icy cold. Just then Jia Qiang came
running up:
     ‘Hurry! hurry! You can go now.’
At the word of command Jia Rui bounded out of his hole and sprinted for dear life
through the rear gate and back to his own home. It was now past midnight, and he
had to shout for someone to let him in. When the servant who answered the gate
saw the state he was in and asked him how it had happened, he had to pretend that
he had been out in the darkness to ease himself and had fallen into the jakes. Then
rushing into his own room he stripped off his clothes and washed, his mind running
all the time on how Xi-feng had tricked him. The thought of her trickery provoked a
surge of hatred in his soul; yet even as he hated her, the vision of her loveliness made
him long to clasp her to his breast. Torn by these violent and con?flicting emotions,
he passed the whole night without a single wink of sleep.
From that time on, though he longed for Xi-feng with un?abated passion, he never
dared to visit the Rong-guo mansion again. Jia Rong and Jia Qiang, on the other hand,
came frequently to his house to ask for their money, so that he was in constant dread
of his grandfather finding out about the IOUs.
Unable, even now, to overcome his longing for Xi-feng, saddled with a heavy burden
of debt, harassed during the day?time by the schoolwork set him by his exacting
grandfather, worn-out during the nights by the excessive hand-pumping inevitable in
an unmarried man of twenty whose mistress was both unattainable and constantly in
his thoughts, twice frozen, tormented and forced to flee --- what constitution could
with?stand so many shocks and strains without succumbing in the end to illness? The
symptoms of Jia Rui’s illness—a palpitation in the heart, a loss of taste in the mouth,
a weakness in the hams, a smarting in the eyes, feverishness by night and lassi?tude
by day, albumen in the urine and blood-flecks in the phlegm—had all manifested
themselves within less than a year. By that time they had produced a complete
breakdown and driven him to his bed, where he lay, with eyes tight shut, babbling
deliriously and inspiring terror in all who saw him. Physicians were called in to treat
him and some bushels of cinnamon bark, autumn root, turtle-shell, black leek and
Solomon’s seal must at one time and another have been in-fused and taken without
the least observable effect.
Winter went and spring came and Jia Rui’s sickness grew even worse. His grandfather
Dai-ru was in despair. Medical advice from every quarter had been taken and none of
it had proved effective. The most recent advice was that the patient should be given
a pure decoction of ginseng without admixture of other ingredients. So costly a
remedy was far beyond Dai?-ru’s resources and he was obliged to go to the Rong-guo
man?sion to beg. Lady Wang ordered Wang Xi-feng to weigh out two ounces for him
from their own supplies.
‘The other day when we were making up a new lot of pills for Grandmother,’ said
Xi-feng, ‘you told me to keep any of the remaining whole roots for a medicine you
were sending to General Yang’s wife. I sent her the medicine yesterday, sol am afraid
we haven’t any left.’
‘Well, even if we haven’t got any,’ said Lady Wang, ‘you can send to your
mother-in-law’s for some; and probably they will have some at your Cousin Zhen’s.
Between you you ought somehow or other to be able to raise enough to give him. If
you can save a man’s life by doing so, you will have performed a work of merit.’
But though Xi-feng pretended to do as Lady Wang suggested, in fact she made no
such inquiries. She merely scraped a few drams of broken bits together and sent
them to Dai-ru with a message that ‘Lady Wang had instructed her to send this, and
it was all they had.’ To Lady Wang, however, she reported that she had asked the
others and altogether obtained more than two ounces of ginseng which she had sent
to Dai-ru.
Jia Rui now wanted desperately to live and eagerly swal?lowed every medicine that
they offered him; but all was a waste of money, for nothing seemed to do him any
good. One day a lame Taoist appeared at the door asking for alms and claiming to be
able to cure retributory illnesses. Jia Rui, who chanced to overhear him, called out
from his bed:
‘Quick, tell the holy man to come in and save me!’ and as he called, he kotowed
with his head on the pillow. The servants were obliged to bring the Taoist into the
bedroom. Jia Rui clung to him tenaciously.
‘Holy one, save me!’ he cried out again and again.
The Taoist sighed.
‘No medicine will cure your sickness. However, I have a precious thing here that I
can lend you which, if you will look at it every day, can be guaranteed to save your
life.’
So saying, he took from his satchel a mirror which had reflecting surfaces on both its
sides. The words A MIRROR FOR THE ROMANTIC were inscribed on the back. He
handed it to Jia Rui.
‘This object comes from the Hall of Emptiness in the Land of Illusion. It was
fashioned by the fairy Disenchantment as an antidote to the ill effects of impure
mental activity. It has life-giving and restorative properties and has been brought into
the world for the contemplation of those intelligent and hand?some young
gentlemen whose hearts are too susceptible to the charms of beauty. I lend it to you
on one important condition: you must only look into the back of the mirror. Never,
never under any circumstances look into the front. Three days hence I shall come
again to reclaim it, by which time I guarantee that your illness will have gone.’
With that he left, at a surprising speed, ignoring the earnest entreaties of those
present that he should stay longer.
‘This is intriguing!’ Jia Rui thought to himself when the Taoist gave him the mirror.
‘Let me try looking into it as he says, and holding it up to his face he looked into the
back as instructed and saw a grinning skull, which he covered up hastily with a curse:
‘Silly old fool, to scare me like that! -- But let me see what happens when I look into
the other side!’
He turned the mirror round and looked, and there inside was Xi-feng beckoning to
him to enter, and his ravished soul floated into the mirror after her. There they
performed the act of love together, after which she saw him out again. But when he
found himself once more back in his bed he stared and cried out in horror: for the
mirror, of its own accord, had turned itself round in his hand and the same grinning
skull faced him that he had seen before. He could feel the sweat trickling all over his
body and lower down in the bed a little pool of semen that he had just ejaculated.
Yet still he was not satisfied, and turned the face of the mirror once more towards
him. Xi-feng was there beckoning to him again and calling, and again he went in after
her. He did this three or four times. But the last time, just as he was going to return
from the mirror, two figures approached him hold?ing iron chains which they
fastened round him and by which they proceeded to drag him away. He cried out as
they dragged him:
‘Wait! Let me take the mirror with me . . .!
Those were the last words he ever uttered.
To those who stood around the bed and watched him while this was happening he
appeared first to be holding up the mirror and looking into it, then to let it drop; then
to open his eyes in a ghastly stare and pick it up again; then, as it once more fell from
his grasp, he finally ceased to move.
When they examined him more closely they found that his breathing had already
stopped and that underneath his body there was a large, wet, icy patch of recently
ejaculated semen.
At once they lifted him from the bed and busied themselves with the laying-out,
while old Dai-ru and his wife abandoned themselves to a paroxysm of grief. They
cursed the Taoist for a necromancer and ordered the servants to heap up a fire and
cast the mirror upon the flames. But just at that moment a voice was heard in the air
saying, ‘Who told him to look in the front? It is you who are to blame, for confusing
the unreal with the real! Why then should you burn my mirror?’
Suddenly the mirror was seen to rise up and fly out of the room, and when Dai-ru
went outside to look, there was the lame Taoist asking for it back. He snatched it as it
flew towards him and disappeared before Dai-ru’s very eyes.
Seeing that there was to be no redress, Dai-yu was obliged to set about preparing for
the funeral and began by announc?ing his grandson’s death to everybody concerned.
Reading of the sutras began on the third day and on the seventh the coffin was
drawn in procession to temporary lodging in the Temple of the Iron Threshold to
await future reburial. The various members of the Jia family all came in due course to
offer their condolences. From the Rong-guo side Jia She and Jia Zheng each gave
twenty taels of silver and from the Ning-guo side Cousin Zhen also gave twenty taels.
The other members of the clan gave amounts varying from one to four taels
according to their means. A collection made among the parents of the dead man’s
fellow-students raised an additional twenty or thirty taels. Although Dai-ru’s means
were slender, with so much monetary help coming in he was able to perform the
whole business in considerable style.
*
Towards the end of the year in which Jia Rui’s troubles started Lin Ru-hai fell seriously
ill and wrote a letter asking to see Dai-yu again. Though Grandmother Jia was
plunged into deepest gloom by the letter, she was obliged to prepare with all
possible expedition for her granddaughter’s departure. And Bao-yu, though he too
was distressed at the prospect of Dai-yu’s leaving him, could scarcely seek to
interfere in a matter affecting the natural feelings of a father and his child.
Grandmother Jia insisted that Jia Lian should accompany Dai-yu and see her safely
there and back. The various gifts to be taken and the journey-money were, it goes
without saying, duly prepared. A suitable day on which to commence the journey
was quickly determined and Jia Lian and Dai-yu took leave of all the rest and,
embarking with their attendants, set sail for Yangchow.
If you wish for further details, you may learn them in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 13

Qin-shi posthumously acquires the status
of a Noble Dame
And Xi-feng takes on the management
of a neighbouring establishment



After Jia Lian’s departure for Yangchow Xi-feng felt bored and unhappy, particularly in
the evenings when, apart from chatting with Patience, there seemed little to do but
sleep. On the occasion of which we write she had sat beside the lamp with Patience
until late into the evening; then, the bedding having been well warmed, the two
women had gone to bed, where they lay until after midnight discussing the stages of
Jia Lian’s journey and attempting to calculate what point he was likely to have
reached in it. By this time Patience was fast asleep and Xi-feng herself was on the
point of dropping off when she became dimly aware that Qin-shi had just walked into
the room from outside.
     ‘So fond of sleep, Auntie?’ said Qin-shi with a gentle smile. ‘I shall have to begin
my journey today without you to see me off. But never mind! Since you cannot come
to me, I have come to you instead. We two have always been so close, I could not
have borne to leave you without saying good-bye. Besides, I have a last wish that you
alone must hear, because I cannot trust anyone else with it.’
     ‘What is your wish?’ Xi-feng heard herself asking. ‘You can trust me to carry it
out for you.’
     ‘Tell me, Auntie,’ said Qin-shi, ‘how is it that you who are such a paragon among
women that even strong men find more than their match in you can yet be ignorant
of the simple truths expressed in homely proverbs? Take this one:
The full moon smaller grows,
Full water overflows.

Or this:
The higher the climb, the harder the fall.

Our house has now enjoyed nearly a century of dazzling success. Suppose one day
“joy at its height engenders sorrow”. And suppose that, in the words of another
proverb, “when the tree falls, the monkeys scatter”. Will not our reputation as one of
the great, cultured households of the age then turn into a hollow mockery?’
     Qin-shi’s question made Xi-feng feel uneasy, though at the same time inspiring a
deep respect in her for her niece’s fore?sight.
     ‘You are quite right to show concern,’ she said. ‘Is there any means by which we
can keep permanently out of danger?’
     ‘Now you are being silly, Auntie!’ said Qin-shi somewhat scornfully. ‘“The
extreme of adversity is the beginning of prosperity” --- and the reverse of that saying
is also true. Honour and disgrace follow each other in an unending cycle. No human
power can arrest that cycle and hold it permanently in one position. What you can do,
however, is to plan while we are still prosperous for the kind of heritage that will
stand up to the hard times when they come.
     ‘At the moment everything seems well looked after; but in fact there are still two
matters that have not been properly taken care of. If you will deal with them in the
way that I shall presently suggest, you will be able to face the future without fear of
calamity.’
    ‘What two matters?’ Xi-feng asked her.
    ‘Though the seasonal offerings at the ancestral burial-ground are at present
regularly attended to,’ said Qin-shi, ‘no special income has been set aside to pay for
them. That is the first matter. The second matter concerns the clan school. There
again, there is no fixed source of income. Obviously there will be no lack of funds
either for the seasonal offerings or for the school as long as we enjoy our present
prosperity. But where is the money for them coming from in the future, when the
family has fallen on hard times?
    ‘I am convinced that the only way of dealing with these two matters is to invest
now, while we are still rich and powerful, in as much property as possible—land,
farms, and houses—in the area around the burial-ground, and to pay for the seasonal
offerings and the running of the school entirely out of the income from this property.
Moreover the school itself ought to be situated on it. The whole clan, old and young
alike, should be convened and a set of regulations drawn up whereby each family is
made to administer the estate and look after the financing of the seasonal offerings
and the clan school for one year in turn. By making the responsibility rotate in a fixed
order you will remove the possibility of quarrels about it and also lessen the danger
of the property getting mortgaged or sold.
     ‘Then even if the clan gets into trouble and its possessions are confiscated, this
part of its property, as charitable estate, will escape confiscation; and when the
family’s fortunes are in decline, it will be a place where the young people can go to
farm and study, as well as a means of maintaining the ancestral sacrifices in unbroken
succession. To refuse to take thought for the morrow on the grounds that our
present prosperity is going to last for ever would be extremely short-sighted.
     ‘Quite soon a happy event is going to take place in this family, bringing it an even
greater glory than it has enjoyed up to now. But it will be a glory as excessive and as
transitory as a posy of fresh flowers pinned to an embroidered dress or the flare-up
of spilt cooking-oil on a blazing fire. In the midst of that brief moment of happiness
never forget that “even the best party must have an end”. For if you do, and if you fail
to take precautions in good time, you will live to regret it bitterly when it is already
too late.’
     ‘What is this happy event you speak of?’ Xi-feng asked her eagerly.
     ‘That is a secret which may not be revealed to mortal ears. However, for the sake
of our brief friendship on this earth, I leave you these words as my parting gift. Be
sure that you remember them well!

    When the Three Springs have gone, the flowering time will end,
    And each one for himself as best he may must fend.’

Xi-feng was about to ask her another question when she was interrupted by the
sound of the iron chime-bar which hung in the inner gate.
     Four strokes. The signal of death!
     She woke with a start to hear a servant announcing, ‘Mrs Rong of the Ning-guo
mansion is dead.’ A cold sweat broke out over her body and for a while she lay too
stunned to move. Then forcing herself to get up she pulled on her clothes and went
round to Lady Wang’s.
     By this time the entire household had heard the news. All seemed bewildered by
it and all were in one way or another deeply distressed. Those older than Qin-shi
thought of how dutiful she had always been; those in her own generation thought of
her warmth and friendliness; her juniors remem?bered how kindly and lovingly she
had treated them; even the servants, irrespective of sex and age, remembering her
com?passion for the poor and humble and her gentle concern for the old and the
very young, all wept and lamented as loud and bitterly as the rest.
     But we digress.
     During the last few days, since Dai-yu’s return to her father had deprived him of
her companionship, Bao-yu, far from seeking diversion in the company of the others,
had kept to himself, going to bed early every night and sleeping dis?consolately on
his own. The news of Qin-shi’s death came to him in the midst of his dreams, causing
him to start up in bed with a jerk. A sudden stabbing pain shot through his heart. He
retched involuntarily and spat out a mouthful of blood. Aroma and the maids clung
to him, terrified, and asked him what was the matter. They wanted to tell
Grandmother Jia and ask her to send for a doctor; but Bao-yu would not hear of it.
     ‘Don’t worry, it’s of no consequence!’ he told them. ‘Something that happens
when a sudden rush of fire to the heart prevents the blood from getting back into the
right channels.’
     He climbed out of bed as he spoke and told them to bring him some clean
clothes, so that he could see his grandmother and then go straight on to the other
house. Aroma was still concerned for him, but seeing him so determined, allowed
him to have his way.
     Grandmother Jia did not want him to go, either.
     ‘It won’t be clean there,’ she said, ‘with her scarcely yet cold. And besides,
there’s a nasty wind at this time of night. It will be soon enough if you go there first
thing tomorrow.’
     But Bao-yu would not be gainsaid, so she gave instructions for a carriage to be
made ready for him and a numerous retinue of servants to attend him there.
     Arriving in haste at the entrance of the Ning-guo mansion, they found the gates
flung wide open and lanterns on either side turning the night into noonday. Despite
the hour, a multitude of people were hurrying through it in both direc?tions, while
from inside the house issued a sound of lamenta?tion that seemed to shake the very
buildings to their founda?tions.
     Alighting from his carriage, Bao-yu hurried through to the room in which Qin-shi
lay and wept there for a while very bitterly. He then went to call on You-shi, whom he
found ill in bed, struck down by a sudden attack of some gastric trouble from which
she had occasionally suffered in the past. After leaving You-shi, he went to look for
Cousin Zhen.
     By now Jia Dai-ru, Jia Dai-xiu, Jia Chi, Jia Xiao, Jia Dun, Jia She, Jia Zheng, Jia Cong,
Jia Bin, Jia Heng (I), Jia Guang, Jia Chen, Jia Qiong, Jia Lin, Jia Qiang, Jia Chang, Jia Ling,
Jia Yun, Jia Qin, Jia Jin, Jia Ping, Jia Zao, Jia Heng (II), Jia Fen, Jia Fang, Jia Lan, Jia Jun
and Jia Zhi had all arrived, and Bao-yu found Cousin Zhen in their midst addressing
them, though well-nigh choked with tears:
     ‘Everyone, young or old, kinsman or friend, knows that my daughter-in-law was
ten times better than any son. Now that she has been taken from us it’s plain to see
that this senior branch of the family is doomed to extinction!’ and he broke down
once more into incontrollable weeping.
     The men present tried to console him:
     ‘Now that she’s gone, crying isn’t going to bring her back again. The important
thing now is to make your plans for the funeral.’
     ‘Plans? What plans?’ Cousin Zhen cried, somewhat theatrically. ‘Just take
everything I have—everything!’
     As he was speaking Qin Bang-ye and Qin Zhong arrived, and various members of
You-shi’s family, including her two younger sisters. Cousin Zhen deputed Jia Qiong, Jia
Chen, Jia Lin and Jia Qiang from among the younger men present to look after them
and any other guests who might arrive.
     He also instructed someone to invite an expert from the Board of Astronomy to
select dates for the funeral and the ceremonies preceding it. With the approval of
this official it was decided that the lying in state should be for forty-nine days and
that the notification of bereavement indicating the family’s readiness to receive
official visits of condolence should be made in three days’ time. A hundred and eight
Buddhist monks were engaged to perform a Grand Miseri?cordia for the salvation of
all departed souls in the main reception hall of the mansion during these forty-nine
days, while at the same time ninety-nine Taoist priests of the Quan?zhen sect were
to perform ceremonies of purification and absolution at a separate altar in the
Celestial Fragrance pavilion. These arrangements having been made, the body was
moved to a temporary shrine in another pavilion of the All-scents Garden. Fifty
high-ranking Buddhist monks and fifty high-ranking Taoist priests took turns in
chanting and intoning before it on every seventh day.
    Nothing would induce old Jia Jing to return home when he learned of the death
of his grandson’s wife. Immortality was within his grasp and he was not going to
impair his hard-won sanctity with the taint of earthly pollution. Accordingly he left all
these matters to Cousin Zhen to order as he wished.
    Free to indulge his own extravagant tastes, Cousin Zhen had inspected several
sets of deal coffin-boards without finding any to his liking. Xue Pan heard of his
problem when he came round to condole.
    ‘We’ve got a set in our timber-yard,’ he told Cousin Zhen. ‘It’s in a wood
supposed to have come from the Iron Net Mountains. They say that a coffin made
from it will last forever without rotting. It was brought here years ago by my father.
Prince Zhong-yi was going to have it, but when he came unstuck it didn’t get used.
It’s still locked up in store because no one has ever been found who could afford to
buy it. If you are interested, I can have it carried round for you to look at.’
      Cousin Zhen was delighted, and the timber was brought over at once for
everyone to inspect. The planks for the base and sides were at least eight inches thick.
The wood had a grain like areca palm and a fragrance suggestive of musk and
sandalwood. When rapped with the knuckles it gave off a hard, ringing sound like
jade or stone. Everyone was impressed and Cousin Zhen eagerly inquired the price.
Xue Pan laughed.
      ‘I doubt you could buy a set like this for a thousand taels of silver cash down,’ he
said. ‘Blow the price! Give the workmen a couple of taels for carrying it here and it’s
yours.’
      Cousin Zhen thanked him profusely and at once gave orders for the planks to be
sawn up and made into a coffin. Jia Zheng doubted the propriety of using such
material for the burial of a person not of royal blood and insisted that it would be
sufficient to use the best quality deal; but Cousin Zhen refused to listen.
      News was suddenly brought that Qin-shi’s little maid Gem, on hearing that her
mistress was dead, had taken her own life by dashing her head against a pillar. Such
rare devotion excited the wondering admiration of the entire clan. Cousin Zhen at
once had her laid out and encoffined with the rites appropriate to a granddaughter
and ordered her coffin to be placed in the Ascension Pavilion of the All-scents Garden
side by side with Qin-shi’s.
      As Qin-shi had died without issue, another of her little maids called Jewel
volunteered to stand in as her daughter and perform the chief mourner’s duties of
smashing the bowl when the bearers came in to take up the coffin and walking in
front of it in the funeral procession. Cousin Zhen was very pleased and gave orders
that thenceforth everyone was to address her as ‘Miss Jewel’ just as if she were
Qin-shi’s real daughter. In the meantime she installed herself by the coffin and,
comporting herself in the manner prescribed for an unmarried daughter, wept and
wailed until she had almost lost her voice.
     Following these preliminaries, the rest of the clan together with the family
servants all proceeded to carry out their mourning duties according to
long-established precedents and in a correct and orderly manner. The family’s
respect for tradition was, however, a source of great unease to Cousin Zhen when he
reflected on Jia Rong’s status: for Jia Rong was only an Imperial College Student --- an
absurdly insignificant title to write on a funeral banner; and the insignia to which
Qin-shi was entitled would make a very poor showing when borne in the funeral
procession.
      By a stroke of luck the fourth day of the first seven-day period—the day on which
official condolences were scheduled to begin --- brought a visit from Dai Quan, the
Eunuch Cham?berlain of the Da-ming Palace. Having sent his representative along
well in advance with offerings for the departed spirit, he presently arrived himself,
seated in a great palanquin and preceded by criers and men with gongs clearing the
streets before him, to present his offerings in person. Cousin Zhen at once made up
his mind to take advantage of the visit.
      As soon as Dai Quan had made his offering, Cousin Zhen ushered him into the
Honey Bee Gallery, invited him to be seated, and served him with tea. Then, entering
into conversa?tion with his guest, he quickly found occasion to mention the fact that
he was thinking of purchasing a place for his son Jia Rong. The eunuch guessed what
was in his mind, and laughingly inquired whether it was not with a view to adding a
little pomp to the funeral that he had conceived this notion.
      ‘My dear Chamberlain,’ Cousin Zhen readily agreed, you have hit the nail on the
head!’
      ‘Well, by a lucky coincidence,’ said Dai Quan, ‘there is rather a good place going
at this very moment. The Corps of Officers of the Imperial Guard, which has an
establishment of three hundred, has got two vacancies in it. Yesterday Lord
Xiang-yang’s younger brother “Sannikins” begged me for one of them and sent
fifteen hundred taels of silver round to my house to pay for it. He and I have always
been good friends, as you know, and in any case I felt I had to do some?thing, for his
Grandpa’s sake; so I couldn’t very well refuse. “Piggy” Feng, the Military Governor of
Yong-xing, has asked me if he can buy the remaining place for his son, but I haven’t
yet had time to give him a reply. If our young friend here wants it, why not jot down
his particulars and I’ll see what I can do.’
     Cousin Zhen at once ordered someone to write out Jia Rong’s name, age and
lineage on a sheet of red paper. The following description was hurriedly prepared and
handed to Dai Quan for his inspection:

Name: JIA RONG
Place of Origin: (County) Kiangning; (Prefecture) Ying-tian-fu; (Province) Kiangnan.
Status: Imperial College Student
Age:      20
Great-grandfather: General Jia Dai-hua, C.-in-C. Metropolitan Barracks, hereditary
noble of the first rank.
Grandfather:Jia Jing, Palace Graduate of the year 17—.
Father: Hon. Colonel Jia Zhen, third rank (hereditary).
After glancing through it quickly, Dai Quan handed it into the keeping of a young
eunuch secretary at his side.
     ‘When we get back,’ he said to the latter, ‘give this to old Zhao, the President of
the Board of Revenue, with my compli?ments, and ask him if he would kindly make
out a commission for a captain in the Imperial Guard, fifth rank, and also the papers
to go with it with these particulars filled in. Tell him I’ll call round tomorrow to pay in
the money.’
The young eunuch bowed, and Dai Quan rose to go. Seeing that he could no longer
detain him, Cousin Zhen showed him out as far as the main gate. As the eunuch was
getting into his palanquin, Cousin Zhen asked him whether he should take the money
to the Ministry or bring it round to Dai Quan’s own house.
‘Better bring a thousand taels, standard weight, to my house. If you go to the
Ministry, they’re sure to fleece you.’
Cousin Zhen thanked him warmly.
‘When the period of mourning is over,’ he said, ‘I shall bring the young fellow round
to your house to kotow his thanks.’
With that they parted. But no sooner had the eunuch gone than the sound of criers
was once more heard in the street, this time heralding the arrival of the Marchioness
of Zhong?jing, wife of Grandmother Jia’s nephew Shi Ding, with her little niece Shi
Xing-yun. Lady Wang, Lady Xing and Wang Xi-feng received them in Cousin Zhen’s
drawing-room.
Offerings from the Marquises of Jin-xiang and Chuan-ning and the Earl of Shou-shan
were now on display, and those three gentlemen were shortly to be observed
alighting from their palanquins outside. Cousin Zhen went out to meet them and
conducted them up the steps into the main reception hall.
     From then on there was a continuous stream of arrivals, and throughout the
whole forty-nine-day period the street in front of the Ning-guo mansion was
thronged with family mourners in white and mandarins in their’ colourful robes of
office, milling in and out and to and fro all day long.
     The day after Dai Quan’s visit Cousin Zhen made Jia Rong change out of
mourning into a court dress and go to collect his commission. The furnishings and
insignia in the shrine were all rearranged in a manner befitting a person of the fifth
rank. The wording on the spirit tablet which stood on the table of offerings at the
foot of the coffin now read.

Spirit tablet of the Lady Qin-shi of the Jia family
Gentlewoman of the Fifth Rank by Imperial Patent
The gate of the All-scents Garden opening on to the street was thrown wide open
and booths for musicians were erected on either side of it, in which black-coated
funeral bands played at fixed times throughout the day. To either side of them were
displayed the insignia of rank: glittering rows of axes and halberds arranged in
wooden stands. At each side of the gateway vermilion-painted boards inscribed in
large golden characters boldly announced the status of the bereaved:

Honorary Captain of the Imperial Bodyguard
Inner Palace, Northern Capital Division

Inside the gateway, facing the street, a high staging was con?structed on which
Buddhist monks and Taoist priests sat on opposite sides of an altar intoning their
sacred texts. In front of the staging was a notice on which was written in large
characters:



FUNERAL OBSEQUIES

OF

THE LADY QIN-SHI

Senior great-great-granddaughter-in-law of
Jia Yan, Hereditary Duke of Ning-guo, and
wife of the Right Honourable Jia Rong, Captain
in the Imperial Bodyguard, Inner Palace:

                   WHEREAS
                             in this favoured Country, situate in the centre-
                             most part of the four continents of the earth,
                               on which it has pleased Heaven to bestow the
                               blessings of everlasting prosperity and peace,

WE,
the Very Reverend Wan-xu, Co-President of
the Board of Commissioners having author?ity
over all monks and clergy of the Incorporeal,
EverAranquil Church of the Lord Buddha,

and
the Venerable Ye-sheng, Co-President of the
Board of Commissioners having authority
over all priests and practitioners of the Primordial,
All-unifying Church of the Heavenly Tao,

HAVE,
with all due reverence and care, prepared
offices for the salvation of all departed
souls, supplicating Heaven and calling upon
the Name of the Lord Buddha.

NOW,
earnestly praying and beseeching the Eight?een
Guardians of the Sangha, the Warlike
Guardians of the Law, and the Twelve
Guardians of the Months mercifully to extend
their holy compassion towards us, but
terribly to blaze forth in divine majesty
against the powers of evil, we do solemnly
perform for nine and forty days the Great
Mass for the purification, deliverance and
salvation of all souls on land and on sea...


—and a great deal more on those lines which it would be tedious to repeat.



*
Although Cousin Zhen now had every reason to feel satisfied with his arrangements,
there was still one matter which caused him uneasiness. You-shi’s unfortunate illness
meant that she was unable to discharge any of her social obligations, and he was
mortally afraid that with so many great ladies coming to the house on visits of
condolence, some breach of etiquette might occur which would cause the family to
look ridiculous.
Bao-yu once chanced to be sitting next to him when his mind was dwelling on this
problem, and observing the gloomy and preoccupied expression on his cousin’s face,
asked him why he should still be worried now that everything had been so excellently
taken care of. Cousin Zhen explained that it was the present lack of a responsible
female head of household which was the cause of his concern.
    ‘That’s no problem!’ said Bao-yu encouragingly. ‘I know just the person for this.
Put her in temporary control here for a month, and I guarantee that you will have
nothing further to worry about.’
    ‘Who?’ inquired Cousin Zhen eagerly.
    Bao-yu deemed it imprudent to mention her name out loud in the hearing of so
many friends and relations, so leaning across he whispered it in Cousin Zhen’s ear.
Cousin Zhen’s reaction was ecstatic.
‘Yes, absolutely the right person!’ he cried. ‘Let’s see about it straight away!’
     And seizing Bao-yu by the hand, he excused himself to the company and hurried
round to the reception room in his own apartment.
It so happened that this day was not one of the seven on which masses were said, so
visitors from outside the family were fairly few. In the inner apartments there was
only a hand?ful of lady visitors, all of them close connections of the Jia family, whom
Lady Xing, Lady Wang, Wang Xi-feng and various female members of the clan were
keeping company. When a servant announced ‘The Master is here’, all these females
jumped up with little shrieks of alarm and rushed off to hide themselves—all, that is,
except Xi-feng, who rose slowly to her feet and imperturbably stood her ground.
Cousin Zhen had of late been feeling far from well. The debility his sickness caused
him had been further aggravated by excessive grief and obliged him to support
himself with a staff. Lady Xig was concerned to see the pitiflil figure he presented as
he entered the room.
‘You are not well,’ she said, ‘and you have been doing too much now for days. You
ought to be getting some rest. What do you want to come in here for?’
Clutching his staff in his hand, Cousin Zhen struggled down on to his knees, and
having made his duty to his aunts, began thanking them for all their trouble. Lady
Xing hurriedly ordered Bao-yu to raise him up and commanded a chair to be moved
forward for him to sit on. But Cousin Zhen refused to be seated.
‘I have come to ask you three ladies a favour,’ he said, forcing his woebegone
features into a smile.
    ‘What is it you want?’ Lady Xing asked him.
    ‘As you doubtless know,’ said Cousin Zhen, ‘my wife has been ill in bed ever since
our daughter-in-law’s death, and with no one to run her side of the household it has
been getting into a pretty deplorable state. I should like to ask Cousin Feng if she
could possibly see her way to running things here for us during the coming month. It
would be a great relief to me if she could.’
      ‘So that’s what you want!’ said Lady Xing with a smile. ‘Feng is now part of your
Aunt Wang’s establishment. You’d better talk to her about it.’
        ‘She’s only a child yet; you know,’ Lady Wang put in hastily. ‘What experience
has she ever had of this kind of thing? Suppose she proved not quite up to the task.
We should all be made to look ridiculous. I think you had better trouble someone
else.’
      ‘I can easily guess what is in your mind, Aunt,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘You are afraid
we should overwork her. For I assure you there is no question of her not being a good
enough manager. Even in her childhood games, Cousin Feng had the decisiveness of a
little general, and since she’s married and had some experience of running things
next door, she is a thoroughly seasoned campaigner. I’ve thought the matter over
carefully these past few days and am quite convinced that apart from Cousin Feng
there really isn’t anyone else I can ask. If you won’t let her do this for my sake or my
wife’s sake, at least won’t you let her for the sake of the one who has just died?’
And at this point he burst into tears.
Lady Wang’s only concern had been lest Xi-feng, who had had no experience of
large-scale funerals, might find the task too big for her and perhaps end up by
making a fool of herself. But Cousin Zhen’s moving plea caused her attitude to soften
considerably and she eyed Xi-feng thoughtfully as though struggling to make up her
mind. Xi-feng for her part had always loved managing things and enjoyed showing off
her ability to do so. When Cousin Zhen first made his request, her mind had at once
consented; and now, observing that Lady Wang appeared to be already half
persuaded, she hastened to complete the process.
‘Cousin Zhen has spoken su eloquently. Oughtn’t we per?haps to agree, Aunt?’
‘Do you think you can do it?’ Lady Wang asked her in a low aside.
‘I don’t see why not,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Cousin Zhen has already seen to all the outside
arrangements himself. It’s only a question of looking after the domestic side for a bit.
And even if there is anything I don’t know about, I can always ask you.’
This seemed reasonable enough to Lady Wang, so she said nothing. Seeing that
Xi-feng herself appeared to be willing, Cousin Zhen turned to her with a smile.
‘Actually there isn’t so very much to do,’ he said. ‘You really must let us persuade
you to take this on. Let me make you a reverence now, to show my gratitude. Then,
when this is all over, I shall come round to your place to thank you properly.’
So saying, he clasped his hands before him and made her a formal bow. Xi-feng
hurriedly curtseyed back.
Cousin Zhen now ordered someone to fetch the tallies for the entire Ning-guo
household and instructed Bao-yu to hand them to Xi-feng.
‘I want you to manage things whatever way you like,’ he told her. ‘Anything you
want you can get by using one of these. There is no need to ask me for it. I have only
two requests to make of you. First that you should dismiss from your mind any idea
of trying to save me any money. The important thing is to put on a good show: the
expense doesn’t matter. And secondly that you should treat our people here exactly
as you treat the members of your own household. Don’t be afraid of upsetting them.
Provided that you will observe those conditions, I leave everything in your hands
with the utmost confidence.’
Xi-feng watched Lady Wang, not daring to accept the tallies without her approval.
‘You hear what your cousin says,’ said Lady Wang. ‘You bad better do as he asks.
Only do not take too much upon yourself. If there are any decisions to make, be sure
to ask Cousin Zhen or his wife first.’
Bao-yu had already received the tallies from Cousin Zhen and now thrust them at
Xi-feng. For politeness’ sake she feigned a certain amount of reluctance, but was
soon prevailed upon to accept them.
‘Will you stay here with us,’ Cousin Zhen asked her, ‘or will you be coming over
every day from the other house? If you intend to come over from the other house
every day, it will greatly add to your burdens. We have an apartment here with its
own courtyard which we can very quickly place at your disposal. If you would care to
move in for the next week or two, I am sure we could make you comfortable.’
‘Thank you, but it won’t be necessary,’ said Xi-feng with a smile. ‘I am needed at
the other house too, so it will be best if I come here every day.’
Having accomplished his mission, Cousin Zhen stayed chatting a little longer and then
left. Presently, when the visiting ladies had dispersed, Lady Wang asked Xi-feng what
her plans were for the rest of the day.
‘Please go on without me, Aunt,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Before I go back myself I must first
try to sort out exactly what this job is going to entail.’
Lady Wang accordingly left without more delay in the company of Lady Xing, and the
two ladies returned to the Rong-guo mansion, where we must now leave them.
Alone at last, Xi-feng wandered into a sort of penthouse building where she sat down
and tried to formulate the task that lay ahead. Five major abuses, long habitual in the
Ning-guo establishment, presented themselves to her mind as being specially in need
of attention, viz:
1.Because it was so large and so motley an establishment, things were always getting
lost.
2.Because there was no rational division of labour, it always seemed to be someone
else’s responsibility whenever a job needed to be done.
      3.Because the household’s expenditure was so lavish, money was always getting
misappropriated or misspent.
        4.Because no distinctions were made between one job and another, the
rewards and hardships were unfairly distributed,
5.Because the servants were so arrogant and undisciplined, those with face’ could
brook no restraint and those without could win no advancement.
If you want to know how Xi-feng dealt with these abuses, you will have to read the
chapter which follows.

CHAPTER 14

Lin Ru-hai is conveyed to his last
resting-place in Soochow
And Jia Bao-yu is presented to the Prince of
Bei-jing at a roadside halt

When Lai Sheng, the Chief Steward of the Ning-guo mansion, learned that Xi-feng
had been invited to take on the manage?ment of the household, he called his cronies
together and addressed them in the following terms:
‘Well lads, it seems that they’ve called in Mrs Lian from the other house to run
things here for a bit; so if she should happen to come round asking for anything or
have occasion to talk to you about anything, be sure to do what she says, won’t you?
During this coming month we shall all have to start work a bit earlier and knock off a
bit later than usual. If you’ll put up with a little extra hardship just for this month, we
can make up for it by taking things easy when it’s over. Anyway, I’m relying on you
not to let me down. She’s well known for a sour-faced, hard-hearted bitch is this one,
and once she’s got her back up, she’ll give no quarter, no matter who you are. So be
careful!’
There was a chorus of agreement from the rest. One of them did observe,
half-jokingly, that ‘by rights they could do with someone like her to straighten things
up a bit, consider?ing the state they had got into’. But just at that moment Brightie’s
wife arrived on a mission from Xi-feng. She was to take receipt of some ledger-paper,
buckram, and book-labels, and had a tally in her hand and a slip of paper specifying
the quantities required. The men pressed round her offering her a place to sit and a
cup of tea to drink while one of them hurried off with the list to fetch the needed
items. Not only that, but, having fetched them, he carried them for her all the way to
the inner gate of the mansion, only handing them to her then so that she could take
them in to Xi-feng by herself. Xi-feng at once ordered Sunshine to make them up into
stout workbooks for use in the office. At the same time she sent for Lai Sheng’s wife
and asked her for the register of the household staff. She also told her to get in touch
with all the married females on the staff and arrange for them to assemble first thing
next morning to be told their new duties. Then, after roughly checking through the
numbers in the ‘establishment’ sheet and questioning Lai Sheng’s wife on a few
points, she got into her carriage and drove back home.
At half past six next morning she was back at the Ning-guo mansion. By this time all
the married women on the staff had been assembled. Not daring to go in, they hung
about outside the window listening to Xi-feng discussing work-plans with Lai Sheng’s
wife inside the office. ‘Now that I’m in charge here’, they heard her telling the latter,
‘I won’t promise to make myself agreeable. I haven’t got a sweet temper like your
mistress, you know. You won’t find me letting you do everything just as it suits you.
So don’t let me hear anyone saying "We don’t do it that way here"! From now on,
whatever it is, you do it the way I tell you to, and anyone who departs by as much as
a hair’s breadth from what I say is for it good and proper, no matter how senior or
how important she thinks she is!’
Having delivered herself of this formidable preliminary she ordered Sunshine to call
the roll. One by one the women stepped into the office to be looked at. When she
had looked at them all, Xi-feng proceeded to make her dispositions.
‘This twenty here. I want you to divide yourselves into two shifts of ten. Your job
every day will be to look after lady visitors and serve them tea. That’s all you have to
do. Nothing else.
‘This twenty here. I want you divided into two shifts like the others. Your job will be
serving tea and meals to the family. Nothing else.
‘These forty. Again, two shifts. Your job is to look after the shrine: lighting fresh
joss-sticks, keeping the lamps in oil, changing the drapes. You will also take turns by
the spirit tablet, making offerings of rice and tea, kotowing when the visitors kotow,
wailing when they wail. That is your job and nothing else besides.
‘You four are to look after the cups and plates and so forth in the ladies’ tea-room.
If anything is missing, you share the responsibility between you and a quarter of the
cost will be stopped out of each of your wages.
‘You four here are to look after the dinner-ware: bowls, wine-cups and the like.
Anything missing will be stopped out of your wages.
‘This eight here. I want you to take charge of all funeral offerings sent in from
outside.
‘This eight. I want you to look after oil, candles, and paper-offerings. I’m going to
put the whole lot in your charge; then whenever any is needed somewhere, you
must go to wherever it is and supply them with whatever amount I tell you to.
‘This twenty here. I want you doing night duty by rota. You are to see that all the
gates are locked and keep a look-out for fires. You’ll also be responsible for keeping
the outside properly swept.
‘The rest of you are to be divided up between the different apartments. Each of you
will be responsible for the things in your own apartment, from furniture and antique
ware down to spittoons and dusters. If the tiniest sliver gets lost or broken, you will
be held responsible and will be expected to make it good.
‘Lai Sheng’s wife will make a general inspection every day, and if she catches
anyone idling or gambling or drinking or fighting or being difficult, she will at once
bring them to me for dealing with. And there will be no favouritism. If I find you’ve
done something wrong, I shan’t care whether you’ve been in service here for three
or four generations, it will make no difference to me.
‘Well, now you all know the rules. From now on whenever any trouble occurs I shall
know exactly who to hold respon?sible.
‘Those who are used to working with me at the other place always have a watch
handy, and everything they do, no matter how small a thing it is, is done at a fixed
time. You may not have watches, but at least there is a clock in your master’s
drawing-room you can look at. So here are the main times to remember. At half past
six I shall come over to hear the roll?call. At ten o’clock I take my lunch. I shall see
people with reports to make or tallies to collect up to, but not after, eleven o’clock. At
seven in the evening, as soon as the paper-offerings have been burnt, I shall make a
personal tour of inspection; and when I get back from it, I shall issue those on night
duty with their keys. Then next day I shall be back here again at half past six.
‘I dare say we are all going to be a bit overworked during the days ahead, but I am
sure your master will want to reward you all for your trouble when this is over.’
Xi-feng now proceeded to supervise the distribution of supplies of tea, oil, candles,
feather-dusters, and brooms to some of her work-parties, and to issue others with
table?cloths, chair-covers, cushions, mats, spittoons, footstools, and other
furnishings, an entry of the amount supplied being made in the book as each
consignment was handed over.
A clear record now existed of what individuals were in charge of which parts of the
household, what items they were responsible for, and what duties they were
expected to per?form. Gone now were the days when everyone picked the easiest
tasks to do first and the less popular ones never got carried out; gone the convenient
disorder in which objects had so easily strayed (no one ever knew how) from the
rooms where they belonged. Even with the greatly increased coming and going
occasioned by the bereavement, it was quieter now than it had been before, when
muddle and confusion still pre?vailed. And the old idling and pilfering appeared to
have been eradicated completely. Secure in her authority, respected and obeyed by
all, Xi-feng might be forgiven for contemplating her achievement with a certain
amount of satisfaction.
Meanwhile You-shi was still unwell and Cousin Zhen too crushed by his somewhat
disproportionate grief to think much about eating and drinking. Xi-feng accordingly
had all sorts of invalid slops for You-shi and tempting little delicacies for Cousin Zhen
prepared in the kitchens of the Rong-guo man?sion and sent over each day to the
prostrate couple. Cousin Zhen reciprocated by instructing his own cooks to prepare
dishes of the very highest quality exclusively for Xi-feng and having them carried
round to her in her little penthouse office.
Xi-feng seemed quite tireless in the discharge of her extra duties. Every morning she
would be over at the appointed the rollcall and would sit there alone in her office,
never once emerging to mix with the young Ning-guo women of her own generation.
Even when lady visitors arrived she remained in the office and took no part in their
reception.
The Thirty-fifth had now arrived—an important day in the penitential cycle of seven
times seven days preceding the funeral—and the monks in the main hall had reached
a particularly dramatic part of their ceremonies. Having opened up a way for the
imprisoned souls, the chief celebrant had succeeded by means of spells and
incantations in breaking open the gates of hell. He had shone his light (a little
hand-mirror) for the souls in darkness. He had confronted Yama, the Judge of the
Dead. He had seized the demon torturers who resisted his progress. He had invoked
Ksitigarbha, the Saviour King, to aid him. He had raised up a golden bridge, and now,
by means of a little flag which he held aloft in one hand, was con?ducting over it
those souls from the very deepest pit of hell who still remained undelivered.
Meanwhile the ninety-nine Taoists in the Celestial Fragrance Pavilion were on their
knees offering up a written petition to the Three Pure Ones and calling on the Jade
Emperor himself in his heavenly palace. Outside, on their high staging, with swinging
of censers and scattering of little cakes for the hungry ghosts to feed on, Zen monks
were performing the great Water Penitential. And in the shrine where the coffin
stood, six young monks and six young nuns, magnificently attired in scarlet slippers
and embroidered copes, sat before the spirit tablet quietly murmuring the dharani
that would assist the soul of the dead woman on the most difficult part of its journey
into the underworld. Everywhere there was a hum of activity.
Knowing that the day would be a busy one bringing a greater than usual number of
visitors, Xi-feng had risen at four o’clock in the morning to begin her toilet. By the
time she had completed it, paid her daily tribute to nature, washed her hands, drunk
a few mouthfuls of milk, and rinsed out her mouth, it was already half past six and
Brightie’s wife, at the head of the other female domestics, had been waiting for some
considerable time in the courtyard outside. At last she emerged and stepped into the
waiting carriage. Two horn lanterns inscribed in large characters with the words

RONG-GUO HOUSE

were borne before her as she went.
     The great gate of the Ning-guo mansion was hung with lanterns and there were
rows of identical standard lanterns on each side of the gateway illuminating the
entrance with the brightness of noonday and eerily emphasizing the whiteness of the
mourning-clothes worn by the menservants lined up to receive the carriage. At their
invitation it was drawn in through the centremost of the three gates. Then the
men-servants retired and Xi-feng’s own women hurried forward and raised the
curtain of the carriage for her to descend. She did so, leaning on the shoulder of her
maid Felicity, and the two women with the lanterns led her in, lighting the way for
her as they went, while her other women closed in behind her and the women of the
Ning-guo household advanced to meet her, curtseyed, and chorused their morning
greetings. Xi-feng walked slowly through the All-scents Garden until she came to the
shrine in the Ascension Pavilion. As soon as she caught sight of the coffin the tears,
like pearls from a broken necklace, rolled in great drops down her cheeks. A number
of pages were standing stiffly in the courtyard outside awaiting the command to set
fire to the paper offerings. Xi-feng gave orders for them to begin and for tea to be
offered up inside the shrine. At once there was a clash of cymbals followed by the
mournful strains of a funeral band. An arm?chair had already been called for and set
down facing the spirit tablet. In this Xi-feng now sat, and raising her voice to a shrill
pitch, wept with abandon, whereupon the entire house?hold, high and low, male and
female, indoors and out, res?ponded by breaking into loud and prolonged
lamentation.
Presently a representative of Cousin Zhen and You-shi arrived and begged Xi-feng to
desist. Brightie’s wife poured out a cup of tea for her to rinse her mouth with, and
when she had sufficiently recovered herself she rose to her feet once more took
leave of various members of the clan who were present, and went off to her office in
the penthouse.
An inspection of the roster showed that all the members of her work-parties were
present except for one woman belong?ing to the group responsible for the reception
of friends of the family. Someone was sent to fetch her, and presently the woman
arrived, flustered and fearful.
‘So it is you!’ said Xi-feng with a chilling smile. I suppose you thought that because
you have a somewhat more lady-like job than the rest, you could afford to disobey
my orders!’
‘Oh no, madam, indeed not!’ said the woman. ‘I’ve been coming extra early every
day. It’s only today, because I overslept, that I’m a bit late. Please let me off this once,
madam! It really is the first time.’
Just at that moment Xi-feng observed Wang Xing’s wife from the Rong-guo mansion,
peeping round the door as if looking for a chance to speak to her.
‘Yes, what is it?’ she asked, turning away from the offender but giving her no
indication that she might go.
Wang Xing’s wife approached and said that she wanted a tally authorizing the
purchase of silk cord to be made up into carriage trimmings for the funeral. She
handed Xi-feng a slip of paper on which the order was written. It specified the
number of network trimmings that would be required for two large sedans, four
small sedans, and four carriages, and the number of pounds of silk cord that would
be required for that amount of network. Xi-feng made Sunshine read it out to her,
and having satisfied herself that the figures were correct, told him to enter them in
his book and to issue Wang Xing’s wife with one of the Rong-guo tallies, whereupon
the latter hurried off to complete her mission.
Xi-feng was about to address the latecomer when four more servants from the
Rong-guo mansion came in asking for tallies. She told them to hand over the
order-slips and made Sunshine read them out to her. Two of them contained errors,
and Xi-feng flung them down and told the bearers to ‘go away and come back when
they had got their figures right’. The two of them went off crestfallen.
     Xi-feng next observed Zhang Cai’s wife hovering about at the edge of the room
and asked her what she wanted.
‘It’s those carriage curtains, ma’am. We want the money for the tailor who made
them up.’ Xi-feng took the bill and told Sunshine to enter the figures from it in his
book. But she would not authorize Zhang Cai’s wife to pay for the tailoring until
Wang Xing’s wife had returned the tally for the material used and the buyer’s receipt.
There was a second piece of paper which Sunshine now read, requesting permission
to purchase paper for the windows of Bao-yu’s outer study, which had just been
redecorated. This too Xi-feng kept, and made Sunshine enter the amount in his book.
She told Zhang Cai’s wife that the goods must be supplied first before any payment
could be authorized.
‘Tomorrow another one will be late and the day after that it will be someone else,’
said Xi-feng turning to the still waiting offender, ‘and before we know where we are
we shall have no one turning up at all. I should have liked to let you off, but if I’m
lenient with you the first time, it will be that much harder for me to deal with
someone else the second time; so I am obliged to make an example of you.’ Her face
hardened as she pronounced sentence: ‘Take her out and give her twenty strokes of
the bamboo!’
Seeing that Xi-feng was really angry, the servants dared not show themselves slack in
executing her command. The wretched woman was half-dragged from the room and
the flogging administered in full view of the waiting throng, after which they came in
again, the executioners to report that they had discharged their duty and their victim
to thank Xi-feng for her punishment. Xi-feng threw down one of the Ning-guo tallies.
‘Take this to Lai Sheng and tell him to stop a month’s pay from her wages. If anyone
is late tomorrow they will get forty strokes and the day after that it will be sixty. So if
you enjoy being beaten you have only to come late for roll-call. Dismiss.’
The servants, including the shamefaced and silently weeping victim, trooped off to
their various duties.
Now began a steady stream of servants from both house?holds collecting and
returning tallies, each of whom Xi-feng attended to in a brisk and efficient manner.
From that day onwards the staff of the Ning-guo mansion realized just how
formidable Xi-feng could be and went about their duties in fear and trembling, not
daring to idle or delay.

*

    But let us now turn to Bao-yu. On this particular occasion, fearing that with so
great an influx of visitors Qin Zhong might find himself somewhat overwhelmed,
Bao-yu brought him round to Xi-feng’s office for a quiet chat.
‘Did you smell the food?’ said Xi-feng with a laugh. (She was halfway through her
lunch when they entered.) ‘Come up on the kang and have some!’
‘Thank you, but we have already eaten,’ said Bao-yu.
‘Here, or in the other house?’
‘Catch me eating here with those clowns!’ said Bao-yu. ‘No, back at home, with
Grandmother.’
He and Qin Zhong sat down, and presently Xi-feng finished her lunch. Just then a
woman came in asking for a tally with which to obtain a fresh supply of oil for the
altar lamps.
‘I calculated that you would be needing some by now,’ said Xi-feng with a smile. ‘I
thought you must have forgotten. If you had forgotten, you’d have had to pay for it
yourself. That would have suited me down to the ground!’
‘Oh no, madam! As you say, I just forgot. I only thought of it a moment ago, and I
realized that if I didn’t hurry I should be too late to get a tally.’
So saying, she took her tally and went. For a short while longer the handing over of
tallies and registering of amounts continued.
‘Both your houses use these tallies for everything,’ said Qin Zhong, who had been
watching these transactions with some interest. ‘Suppose some outsider were to
forge one and use it to get a lot of money with?’
‘Not everyone is as crooked as you are!’ said Xi-feng good? humouredly.
‘How is it that there is no one from our place coming in for tallies?’ Bao-yu asked.
‘At the time when they come,’ Xi-feng replied, ‘you are still fast asleep in bed. Now
let me ask you something. When are you going to begin studying at night?’
‘I should like nothing better than to begin today,’ said Bao-yu. ‘But what can I do if
they won’t get on with my study?’
If you were to ask me nicely,’ said Xi-feng jovially, ‘I think I could undertake to hurry
them up for you.’
‘Oh, you’re no good,’ said Bao-yu, ‘no more than any of the rest. They’ll get round
to it in time. It’s just a question of waiting till they do.’
‘Whether they get round to it or not,’ said Xi-feng, ‘they still need materials for the
job, and they can’t get the materials if I don’t choose to give them the tallies—I can
tell you that for sure!’
As soon as he heard this, Bao-yu twined himself round Xi-feng and began coaxing and
wheedling her to give the workmen the tallies that would enable them to begin work
on his study.
‘Stop it! Stop it! ‘ cried Xi-feng. ‘I am so tired that my bones ache. How can I stand
up to being mauled about by a great-ape like you? You needn’t worry. They’ve just
been round to see about paper for the windows. It would look pretty stupid if you
were to send them off for something they have already got.’
Bao-yu refused to believe her until she made Sunshine look up the entry in his book
and show it to him.
While Bao-yu was inspecting the book, a servant announced the arrival of Shiner, one
of the boys who had accompanied Jia Lian to Yangchow. Xi-feng eagerly ordered him
in. Shiner louted to his mistress in the Manchu fashion and hoped that she was well.
‘Why have you come back?’ said Xi-feng.
‘The Master sent me, ma’am. Mr. Lin died on the third at ten in the morning and
the Master and Miss Lin are taking him to Soochow to be buried. They expect to be
home by the end of the spring. The Master told me to bring back the news and to
give everyone his regards, and he said I was to ask Her Old Ladyship for instructions.
He also told me to see if you were getting on all right, ma’am; and he said would I
take some fur-?lined gowns back with me for winter wear.’
‘Have you seen anyone else yet?’ Xi-feng asked him.
‘Yes, everyone,’ said Shiner, and withdrew.
Xi-feng turned to Bao-yu with a smile:
‘It looks now as if your Cousin Lin will be staying with us permanently.’
‘Poor thing!’ said Bao-yu. ‘How she must have cried and cried during this past week
or so!’ The thought of her crying made him knit his brows and sigh.
Now that Shiner was back, Xi-feng was all agog to question him about Jia Lian but
could not do so in any detail in front of the others. She would have liked to follow
him back home, but her duties were by no means over, and she was obliged to hold
out until evening. Then, back in her own apartment, she summoned him to her and
asked him for full particulars of the journey. She looked out all Jia Lian’s furs, and she
and Patience sat up into the night getting them ready and packing them ---together
with anything else which careful thought suggested might be needed—for Shiner to
take back with him to his Master. Xi-feng gave Shiner minute instructions concerning
his conduct towards the latter:
‘Mind you look after your master properly away from home, now. Try not to make
him angry. And do always be on at him not to drink too much. And don’t encourage
him to get mixed up with bad women. If, when you get back, I find out that you have
done, I’ll break your legs!’
Shiner laughingly agreed to abide by all her instructions. By the time they got to bed
it was well past one in the morning. To Xi-feng it seemed as though she had barely
lain down to sleep when it was dawn once more and time to get up again and wash
and dress for another round of duties at Ning-guo House.
The day of the funeral was now approaching and Cousin Zhen took an expert in
geomancy with him in his carriage and drove out to the Temple of the Iron Threshold
to inspect the terrain and personally assist in the selection of a suitable
rest?ing-place for Qin-shi’s coffin. He gave detailed instructions to the
monk-in-charge, Father Sublimitas, for the provision of a completely new set of
hangings and altar furnishings for the funeral, and for the engagement of as many
fashionable monks as he could think of to participate in the ceremony of receiving
the coffin.
Sublimitas hurriedly prepared a vegetarian supper for his visitors; but Cousin Zhen
had little heart for eating, and, as it was by now too late to return to the city,
presently retired to a bed that had been made up for him in the monk’s quarters,
leaving first thing next morning in order to press on with arrangements for the
funeral. On his return he sent some work?men out to the temple to refurbish the
place he had chosen for the coffin. They were instructed to work on the job
through?out the night in order to make sure that it was finished in time. He also sent
out a number of kitchen staff to cater for the funeral party on its arrival.
Xi-feng, too, began to make her own careful preparations as the day of the funeral
drew near. On the one hand she had to select coachmen and bearers from the
Rong-guo staff for the carriages and sedans that Lady Wang and the other Rong-guo
ladies would ride in in the procession. On the other hand, as she fully intended to
take part in it herself, she had to find herself somewhere to stop at on the way as
well as accommodation for the night after the funeral.
The Dowager-duchess of Shan-guo happened to die just about this time and Xi-feng
had to make the arrangements for Lady Xing and Lady Wang when they paid their
visits of condolence and later when they attended the funeral. She had to see about
birthday presents for the Princess of Xi-an. She had to write to her parents and get
things ready to send to them when her elder brother Wang Ren returned with his
wife and children to the South. And when on top of all this Jia Lian’s young sister
Ying-chun fell ill and needed doctors’ visits and medicines every day, it was Xi-feng
who had to puzzle over the diagnostic reports, discuss the patient’s symptoms with
the learned physicians, and decide on the relative merits of rival prescriptions.
Indeed, so multifarious had her activities become that it would be impossible to list
them all. As a consequence she was far too busy to pay much attention to eating and
drinking and could hardly sit or lie down for a moment in peace. When she went to
the Ning-guo mansion she was followed around all the time by people from the
Rong-guo mansion, and when she went back to Rong-guo House, members of the
Ning-guo establishment would trail after her. Yet although she was so busy, a passion
to succeed and a dread of being criticized enabled her to summon up reserves of
energy, and she managed to plan everything with such exemplary thoroughness that
every member of the clan was loud in her praises.
Wake night arrived—the night when no one in the family may go to bed—and
Ning-guo House was crowded with friends and relations. Since You-shi was still
confined to her room, it was left entirely to Xi-feng to do the honours. There were, to
be sure, a number of other young married women in the clan, but all were either
tongue-tied or giddy, or they were so petrified by bashfulness or timidity that the
presence of strangers or persons of higher rank threw them into a state of panic.
Xi-feng’s vivacious charm and social assurance stood out in striking contrast—‘a
touch of scarlet in a field of green’. She was in her element, and if she took any notice
at all of her humbler sisters it was only to throw out an occasional order or to bend
them in some other way to her imperious will.
Throughout the whole of that night the Ning-guo mansion was ablaze with lights.
There was a constant bustle of guests being welcomed or seen off the premises and
all the liveliness and excitement that is customary on occasions of this sort.
With the dawning of the day and the arrival of the hour deemed auspicious for its
departure, sixty-four green-coated bearers arrived for the coffin, preceded by a great
funeral banner bearing the following inscription:
Mortal Remains
of the
Much Lamented
LADY QIN-SHI
of the
House of Jia,
Senior Great-great-granddaughter-in-law
of the
Duke of Ning-guo,
Nobleman of the First Rank by Imperial Patent,
and Wife of the
Right Honourable Jia Rong,
Honorary Captain in the Imperial Bodyguard,
Inner Palace, Northern Capital Division.

The costumes, insignia, and funeral trappings were all glitteringly new, having been
specially made for the occasion.
Jewel, acting in the capacity of unmarried daughter of the deceased, smashed a bowl
on the floor at the foot of the coffin and as they bore it out walked in front with an
impressive display of grief.
Among the distinguished guests taking part in the proces?sion were:
    Niu Ji-zong (earl, hereditary first rank), grandson of Niu Qing, Duke of Zhen-guo,
    Liu Fang (viscount, hereditary first rank), grandson of Liu Biao, Duke of Li-guo,
Chen Rui-wen (Maj.-General), grandson of Chen Yi, Duke of Qi-guo,
    Ma Shang-de (Maj.-General), grandson of Ma Kui, Duke of Zhi-guo,
Hou Xiao-kang (viscount, hereditary first rank), grandson of Hou Xiao-ming, Duke of
Xiu-guo.
The grandfathers of the above, together with the Duke of Shan-guo, whose grandson
Shi Guang-zhu was in mourning for the Dowager-duchess and unable to attend, and
the Dukes of Rong-guo and Ning-guo, had formed the well-known group often
referred to by their contemporaries as the ‘Eight Dukes’.
The other mourners included:

The grandson of H. H. the Prince of Nan-an,
The grandson of H. H. the Prince of Xi-ning,
    Shi Ding, Marquis of Zhong-jing, nephew of old Lady Jia,
Jiang Zi-ning (baron, hereditary second rank), grandson of the Marquis of Ping-yuan,
Xie Kun (baron, hereditary second rank, and lieutenant-colonel, Metropolitan
Barracks), grandson of the Marquis of Ding-cheng,
    Qi Jian-hui (baron, hereditary second rank), grandson of the Marquis of
Xiang-yang,
Qiu Liang (Chief Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan Area), grandson of the
Marquis of Jing-tian.

Also present were the Marquis of Jin-xiang’s son Han Qi, General Feng’s son Feng
Zi-ying, General Chen’s son Chen Ye-jun, General Wei’s son Wei Ruo-An, and a large
number of other young gentlemen of distinguished parentage.
As for lady guests, there were ten or so large and thirty or forty small palanquins,
which together with the palanquins and carriages of the Jia ladies brought the total
number of equipages to at least a hundred and ten. These, with the innumerable
bearers of insignia and other funeral trappings up at the front, formed a procession
altogether more than a mile long.
The procession had not advanced very far when it began to pass the decorated
‘funeral bowers’ and tables of offerings put up along the sides of the street by friends
and well-wishers of the family. From some of them the strains of funeral music struck
up as it approached.
The first of these bowers was the Princess of Dong-ping’s, the second was the Prince
of Nan-an’s, the third was the Prince of Xi-ning’s, and the fourth that of the Prince of
Bei-jing.
Of the original holders of these four titles the Prince of Bei-jing had been highest in
imperial favour by virtue of his great services to the Crown. As a consequence, the
title and the style of ‘prince’ had been retained by his descendants. The present
holder of the title, Shui Rong, was a youth still in his teens ---a young man of great
personal beauty and a modest and unaffected disposition. On receiving the
announcement of the premature demise of the wife of one of the Duke of
Ning-?guo’s descendants, Shui Rong was reminded of the friendship that had
formerly existed between the Duke of Ning-guo and his own ancestor—both having
fought in the same campaigns and shared hardships and triumphs together—and
resolved to lay aside all considerations of rank in demonstrating his sympathy for the
bereaved. Two days previously he had paid a visit of condolence and made inquiries
about the funeral arrangements, and now, today, intending to make a libation to the
coffin as it went by, he had had his booth constructed at the road side and had
instructed a number of his staff to wait there in readiness for his arrival.
At four o’clock that morning the prince had had to be present at the imperial palace
for the early levée; but, as soon as his business there was over, he changed out of
court dress and into mourning and after getting into his great palanquin, was borne
through the streets, preceded by gongs and umbrellas of state, to the place where his
funeral bower had been erected. There his palanquin was set down and the
gentlemen of his household ranged themselves on either side of it. The street was
kept clear of traffic and pedestrians while he waited.
Presently the procession came in sight, advancing from the north end of the street
like a great river, the hearse itself look?ing like some great silver mountain that
crushed the earth beneath it as it moved. In a trice the forerunners had reported
back to Cousin Zhen, who at once gave orders to the insignia bearers to halt, and
hurrying forward with his Uncles Jia She and Jia Zheng, saluted the prince with full
court etiquette. The prince received their prostrations with a gracious smile and a
slight inclination of his person inside the palanquin, and when he spoke to them it
was not as a prince to a subject, but using the form of address he employed when
speaking to family friends.
‘Your Highness, I am quite overwhelmed by the honour you do us in graciously
condescending to be present at the funeral of my daughter-in-law,’ said Cousin Zhen.
‘My dear friend,’ said the Prince of Bei-jing, ‘your excessive modesty does us both
an injustice.’
Thereupon he turned to the chamberlain of his household and ordered him to make
offerings on his behalf. Cousin Zhen and his uncles made the correct ritual responses
while this official performed them, then returned to the palanquin and bowed their
thanks to the prince. The prince received their thanks with a most becoming modesty
and by way of conversa?tion asked Jia Zheng a question about Bao-yu.
‘Which is the boy who was born with a stone in his mouth? I have long looked
forward to the pleasure of meeting him. I am sure he must be here today. Can you
not bring him to see me?’
Jia Zheng at once withdrew to fetch Bao-yu. He made him first change into court
dress before, leading him forward to meet the prince.
Bao-yu had often heard about the Prince of Bei-jing. He had heard that he was very
clever. He had also heard that he was as handsome as he was clever and that he was
a quite jolly, un?conventional sort of person who refused to let either his royal birth
or the conventions of official life constrain him. He had often wanted to meet him,
but had been deterred by his father’s strictness from doing so. And now here was the
Prince of Bei-jing asking to see him! A feeling of pleasant anticipation filled him as he
hurried forward with his father. He peeped up at the prince as they advanced and
saw that he was, as report had painted him, an extremely good-looking young man.
But if you want to know about his interview with the hand?some prince, you will
have to read about it in the next chapter.
CHAPTER 15

At Water-moon Priory Xi-feng finds how much profit may
procured by the abuse of power
And Qin Zhong discovers the pleasures that are to
be had under the cover of darkness



Looking up, Bao-yu saw that Shui Rong’s princely headgear was embellished by way
of mourning with white bands, a white hatpin, and filigree silver ‘wings’. As a further
token of mourning his robe, though heavily bordered with a ‘tooth and wave’ design
of rainbow-coloured stripes and gold-emblazoned with the royal five-clawed dragon,
was of a white material. It was confined at the waist by a red leather belt, studded
with green jade. The splendid costume, the luminous eyes, the finely chiselled
features really did make him an arrestingly handsome young man. Bao-yu started
forward impulsively to make his salutation, but the prince extended an arm from the
palanquin and prevented him from kneeling.
     Bao-yu was wearing a little silver coronet on the top of his head and a silver
headband round his brow in the form of two dragons emerging from the sea. He had
on a narrow-sleeved, full-skirted robe of white material and a silver belt inlaid with
pearls. After studying these and admiring the flowerlike face and coal-black eyes, the
prince’s face broke into a smile.
         ‘If “Bao-yu” means “precious jade”, you are appropriately named,’ he said.
‘But where is the famous stone you were born with?’
     Bao-yu hurriedly extracted the jade from inside his clothing and taking it off,
handed it to the prince, who scrutinized it carefully, reciting the words of the
inscription as he deciphered them.
     ‘And does it really have these powers?’ he asked.
     ‘It is only alleged to,’ Jia Zheng put in hastily. ‘We have never put them to the
test.’
     The prince pronounced the stone a great wonder and with his own hands
refastened its plaited silken cord round Bao-yu’s neck. Then, taking one of Bao-yu’s
hands in his own, he asked him how old he was, what books he was studying, and
other such questions, to all of which Bao-yu gave prompt replies.
     Delighted that everything Bao-yu said was so clear and to the point, the prince
observed to Jia Zheng that ‘the young phoenix was worthy of his sire.
‘I trust I shall not offend you by saying so to your face,’ he said, ‘but I venture to
prophesy that this fledgling of yours will one day “sing sweeter than the parent bird”.’
Jia Zheng smiled politely.
‘My son is doubtless unworthy of the compliment Your Highness is good enough to
pay him. If; thanks to your en?couragement, he turns out as you say, we shall count
ourselves truly fortunate.’
‘There is only one drawback in possessing such charm,’ said the prince. ‘I am sure it
must make his grandmother dote upon him; and, unfortunately, being the object of
too much affection is very bad for people of our years. It leads us to neglect our
studies. This used at one time to be the case with me, and I suspect is now the case
with your son. If he does find difficulty in working at home, he would be very
welcome to come round to my palace. I do not pretend to be a gifted person myself;
but I am fortunate in counting distinguished writers from all over the empire among
my acquaintances, and my palace is a rendezvous for them when they are in the
capital, so that I never want for intellectual company. By constantly mixing and
conversing with such people at my palace, your son could do much to improve his
education.’
‘Yes.’ Jia Zheng bowed deferentially.
The Prince of Bei-jing removed a rosary from his wrist and handed it to Bao-yu.
‘Today is our first meeting, but as it was an unforeseen one, I have not come
prepared with a suitable gift. All I can offer you is this rosary made of the aromatic
seeds of some Indian plant. It was given me by his Imperial Majesty. I hope you will
accept it as a little token of my esteem.’
Bao-yu took the rosary and turning back offered it respect?fully to Jia Zheng, who
made his son join him in formally thanking the prince for his gift.
At this point Jia She and Cousin Zhen knelt before the prince and invited him to
return.
‘The Departed is now in paradise,’ said the prince. ‘Though I enjoy imperial favour
and princely rank, I would not presume to go past her carriage. Heavenly honours
take precedence over earthly ones!’
When they saw that the prince was adamant, Jia She and the rest bowed their thanks,
then, having ordered the musicians to vail their instruments and march by in silence,
they caused the front part of the procession and the hearse to pass over the junction.
As soon as the hearse had gone over, the prince and his retinue crossed in the other
direction, after which the rear part of the procession moved forward and caught up
with the rest.



*
The liveliness which attended the procession during the whole of its progress
through the city reached a climax as it ap?proached the city gate, for it was along this
last stretch that the colleagues and office juniors of Jia She, Jia Zheng and Cousin
Zhen had arranged their bowers, and it was necessary to stop and thank each one of
them as they made their offerings to the passing hearse. They did at last succeed in
getting out of the city gate, however, after which a clear road lay ahead all the way to
the Temple of the Iron Threshold. Cousin Zhen went round with Jia Rong to the
senior men among the mourners and invited them to proceed from there onwards by
the transport provided. The upshot was that those of Jia She’s generation got into
carriages and sedans, while Cousin Zhen and the younger men mounted on
horseback.
Xi-feng was worried about Bao-yu. Out in the country, she thought, he was liable to
become wild and disobedient. She felt sure that he would get up to some kind of
mischief now that he was removed from Jia Zheng’s restraint. Accordingly she sent
one of her pages to summon him, and presently he rode up to her carriage.
‘Bao dear,’ said Xi-feng, ‘a person of your refinement belongs here with us. You
don’t want to go clomping around the countryside like apes on horseback with those
horrid men! Why not get in with me? The two of us will keep each other company.’
Bao-yu at once dismounted and climbed up into the carriage, and the two of them
drove on, laughing and chattering as they went. They had not been driving very long
when two horse?men galloped up beside them, dismounted, and leaning into the
carriage, informed Xi-feng that they were now near her stopping-place, in case she
wished to get out and ‘stretch her legs’. Xi-feng sent them on ahead to ask Lady Xing
and Lady Wang for instructions. The latter sent back word that they had no desire to
stop, themselves, but that Xi-feng was wel?come to do so if she wished. Xi-feng
accordingly gave orders for a short halt. At once the pages led the horses out of the
main stream of traffic and headed northwards down a small side-road.
Bao-yu hurriedly sent someone off to fetch Qin Zhong, who was riding along behind
his father’s sedan. As the page came hurrying up and asked him to stop with Bao-yu
for a little refreshment, he turned round and saw Bao-yu’s horse in the distance,
jogging along in a northerly direction with an empty saddle on its back behind
Xi-feng’s carriage, and he realized that Bao-yu must be inside the carriage with
Xi-feng. Turning his horse’s head about, he hurried after, and followed them into the
gateway of a farm.

Apart from the barns and outhouses, the farmhouse con?sisted of little more than a
single large room, so that there was nowhere the farmer’s womenfolk could go to be
out of the way of the visitors. The sudden appearance in their midst of Xi-feng,
Bao-yu and Qin Zhong with their fashionable clothes and delicate city faces seemed
to these simple countrywomen more like a celestial visitation than a human one.
As soon as they were inside the thatched central building, Xi-feng asked the boys to
amuse themselves outside. Bao-yu realized that she needed to be alone, and
conducted Qin Zhong and the pages on a tour of the farmyard. He had never in his
life seen any of the farming implements before, and was very curious. One of his
pages who had some experience of country matters was able to name each
implement for him and explain its functions. Bao-yu was impressed.
‘Now I can understand the words of the old poet,’ he said:

‘Each grain of rice we ever ate
Cost someone else a drop of sweat.’

At that moment they came to an outhouse in which was a kang with a
spinning-wheel on it. Bao-yu was even more intrigued.
‘That’s for spinning yarn with to make cloth out of,’ said the pages.
Bao-yu at once got up on the kang and had just started to turn it when a country lass
of seventeen or eighteen summers came running up:
‘Don’t! You’ll spoil it!’
She was shouted at fiercely by the pages, but Bao-yu had already stayed his hand.
‘I’m sorry. I’ve never seen one before. I was just turning it for fun, to see how it
works.’
‘You don’t know how to turn it properly,’ said the girl. Let me show you how ‘tis
done.’
Qin Zhong gave Bao-yu a sly tug:
‘A comely damosel, thinkest thou nottest?’
‘Shut up, or I’ll clout you!’ said Bao-yu, pushing him.
During this muttered exchange the girl had begun spinning. She did, indeed, make a
charming picture as she bent over her work. Suddenly an old woman’s voice called
out from the other side of the yard:
‘Ertie! Come here at once my gal.’
The girl jumped up from her spinning and hurried over. Bao-yu’s spirits were quite
dashed by her abrupt departure.
But just then someone came from Xi-feng inviting the boys indoors. They found her
washed and changed. She asked them if they wanted to ‘change’ too, but Bao-yu
replied that they did not. Then a variety of cakes and sweets were brought in by the
servants, and fragrant tea was poured for them to drink. When the three had taken
their fill of these refreshments and everything had been cleared away and re?packed
by the servants, they rose up and got back into their carriage.
Outside in the yard Brightie handed the farmer’s family their payment, which he had
brought with him ready-wrapped in coloured paper, and the womenfolk hurried up
to the carriage to express their thanks. Bao-yu scanned their faces carefully, but could
not see his spinning-girl amongst them. They had not driven far, however, when he
caught sight of her at the end of the village. She was standing watching for him
beside the road, a baby brother in her arms and two little girls at her side. Bao-yu
could not repress a strong emotion on seeing her, but sitting there in the carriage
there was not much he could do but gaze back at her soulfully; and soon, as the
carriage bowled along at a smarter pace, Ertie was lost to sight for ever.
With talk and laughter to beguile them, the journey passed quickly. Soon they had
caught up with the main procession; soon the sound of drums and cymbals was
heard and they could see ahead of them the banners and umbrellas of the monks
from the Temple of the Iron Threshold who had come out in procession and lined
either side of the road to welcome them; and soon they were inside the temple,
where further ceremonies awaited them, a new staging having been erected for this
purpose. The coffin was installed in one of the side-chapels leading off the inner hall,
and Jewel arranged her sleeping-quarters near by to continue her watch over it.
In the outer hall Cousin Zhen was busy attending to his guests, some of whom were
staying on, while others wished to leave immediately. To each he tendered formal
thanks for their trouble in coming. They left in order of seniority; duke’s kin going
first, then those of marquises, then those of earls, then those of viscounts, then
those of barons, and so on down?wards. It was three o’clock by the time the last of
them had gone.
Xi-feng received the lady guests inside. They, too, left in order of precedence and had
not finally dispersed until around two o’clock. Only members of the clan and a few
very close friends stayed behind to see the ceremonies through to their conclusion
two days later.
Lady Xing and Lady Wang were among those who left. They could see that Xi-feng
would be unable to return that day and wanted to take Bao-yu back with them into
town. But Bao-yu, after his first taste of the countryside, was extremely loth to return
and begged to stay with Xi-feng; so Lady Wang went without him, leaving him in
Xi-feng’s charge.
The Temple of the Iron Threshold was a private foundation of the Dukes of Ning-guo
and Rong-guo which still had some land of its own in which members of the clan who
died in the capital could be given temporary burial. The thoughtful Dukes had
provided accommodation not only for the dead but also for the living, in the form of
guest-rooms in which mourners might temporarily reside until their funereal
busi?ness was over What the old gentlemen had not foreseen was that their
multitudinous progeny would come in time to exhibit differences of wealth and
temperament so extreme as often to render their possessors mutually intolerable
and that, whereas the more hard-up members of the clan gladly occupied the
accommodation provided, the more affluent or preten?tious found it ‘inconvenient’
to stay there and preferred to seek alternative accommodation in the farmsteads and
convents round about.
Xi-feng was among those who found the Iron Threshold accommodation
‘inconvenient’. Some time previously she had sent someone to Wheat-cake Priory to
make arrangements on her behalf with the prioress Euergesia, and the old nun had
turned out several rooms in readiness for her arrival. ‘Wheat-cake Priory’ (so-called
because of the excellent steamed wheat bread made in its kitchens) was the popular
name for Water-moon Priory, an offshoot of Water-moon Abbey situated at no great
distance from the Temple of the Iron Threshold.
Presently, when the monks had finished their service and the evening offering of tea
had been made, Cousin Zhen sent Jia Rong in to Xi-feng with a message inviting her
to retire. Having first glanced round to ascertain that a sufficient number of Jia ladies
were present to look after the still remaining guests, Xi-feng bade the company good
night and left for Wheat-cake Priory with Bao-yu and Qin Zhong. Qin Zhong had
attached himself to the other two when his father Qin Bang-ye, unable by reason of
his age and frail state of health to risk a night away from home, had gone back to the
city, leav?ing him to await the conclusion of the requiem services on his own.
They soon arrived at the priory and were met by Euergesia, who had brought her two
little disciples Benevolentia and Sapientia to welcome them. As soon as the first
greetings were over, Xi-feng retired to her room to wash and change. Emerg?ing
refreshed, she observed how much taller Sapientia had grown and how radiantly
good-looking, and inquired of Euergesia why she and her two charges had lately not
been into town to see them.
‘It is on account of Mr. Hu’s good lady,’ said the old nun. ‘She has lately been
brought to bed of a boy, and sent us ten taels of silver for a three-day recital of the
Lake of Blood sutra by some of the sisters to purge the stain of childbirth. We have
been so busy with the arrangements that we haven’t had time to call.’
Let us leave Xi-feng in conversation with the prioress and turn to the other two.
Qin Zhong and Bao-yu were amusing themselves in the main hall of the priory when
Sapientia happened to pass through.
‘Here’s Sappy,’ said Bao-yu with a meaningful smile.
‘Well, what about it?’ said Qin Zhong.
‘Now, now, stop play-acting!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I saw you holding her that day at
Grandma’s when you thought nobody else was about. You needn’t think you can fool
me after that!’
‘I don’t know what you’re talking about.’
‘All right then. Never mind whether you know what I’m talking about or not. Just
ask her to pour me out a cup of tea, will you, and then we’ll let the subject drop.’
‘What sort of joke is this? Why can’t you ask her yourself? She’d pour it out just the
same for you. Why ask me to tell her?’
‘I couldn’t do it with the same feeling as you. There’ll be much more feeling in it if
you ask her.’
He finally prevailed upon Qin Zhong to make the request.
‘Oh, all right! - Sappy, pour us a cup of tea, will you?’
Sapientia had been a regular visitor at the Rong-guo mansion ever since she was a
little girl and was familiar with all its inmates. The innocence of her childish rompings
with Bao-yu and Qin Zhong had latterly, however—now that she had reached
adolescence—given way to a more mature emotion. She had fallen in love with Qin
Zhong, whose every feature and lineament now inspired her with romantic feelings;
and Qin Zhong, captivated by her developing charms, had responded by loving her
back. Although nothing serious had as yet passed between them, in their inclinations
and affections they were already united.
Sapientia hurried out and returned with a cup of tea.
‘Give it to me, Sappy!’ said Qin Zhong.
‘No, give it to me, Sappy I’ said Bao-yu.
She stood between them, pouting prettily, and gave a little laugh:
‘Surely you’re not going to fight over a cup of tea? I must have honey on my hands
I’
Bao-yu snatched the cup before Qin Zhong could do so and began drinking. He was
about to say something when Benevo?lentia came in and fetched Sapientia away to
help her lay the table. She was back again presently to invite the two boys to tea and
cakes; but neither of them felt much enthusiasm for such feminine repasts, and after
sitting a short while for the sake of politeness, were soon off to amuse themselves
else?where.
Xi-feng, too, soon left, and retired to her private room to rest, Euergesia
accompanying her. By this time the older servants, seeing that there was nothing
further for them to do, had one by one drifted off to bed, leaving only a few personal
maids, all of whom were in Xi-feng’s confidence, in attend?ance. The old nun
deemed it safe to broach a private matter in their hearing.
‘There is something I have been meaning to call at your house and ask Her Ladyship
about, but I should like to have your opinion on it first before I see her.’
‘What do you want to ask her?’ said Xi-feng.
‘Bless his Holy Name!’ the prioress began piously. ‘When I was a nun at the
Treasures in Heaven Convent in Chang-an, one of the convent’s benefactors was a
very wealthy man called Zhang, who had a daughter called Jin-ge. A certain young Mr.
Li, who is brother-in-law to the Governor of Chang-an, met her once when she was
making an incense? offering in our temple and took a violent liking to her. He at once
sent someone to the parents to ask for her hand in marriage, but unfortunately she
was already betrothed to the son of a captain in the Chang-an garrison and the
betrothal-presents had already been accepted. The Zhangs would have liked to
cancel the betrothal but were afraid that the captain would object, so they told Li’s
matchmaker that the girl was already engaged. But oh dear! young Mr. Li wouldn’t
take no for an answer, and the Zhangs were quite at their wit’s end, being now in
trouble with both parties. You see, when the captain got to hear of these goings-on
he was most unreason?able. He came rushing along in a great rage and made a most
terrible scene. ‘Just how many young men is this girl be?trothed to?” he said, and so
on and so forth. He refused out?fight to take back the betrothal-gifts and straightway
began an action for breach of promise. By now the Zhangs were really upset and sent
to the capital for some moral support -- for they are now quite determined to break
off their daughter’s en?gagement, seeing that the captain has been so unreasonable.
‘Well, it occurred to me that the Area Commander for Chang-an, General Yun, is on
very good terms with your husband’s family, and I thought I might try to find some
way of persuading Her Ladyship to talk to Sir Zheng about this and get him to write a
letter to General Yun and ask him to have a word with this captain. It is hardly likely
that he would refuse to obey his commanding officer. The Zhangs would gladly pay
anything—even if it meant bankrupting themselves ---in return for this kindness.’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘It doesn’t sound very difficult. The only difficulty is that Lady Wang doesn’t touch
this kind of thing any more.’
‘If Her Ladyship won’t, what about you, Mrs Lian?’
Xi-feng laughed again.
‘I’m not short of money; and besides, I don’t touch that sort of thing either.’
Euergesia’s face assumed an expression of great benignity. After sitting for a while in
silence she sighed.
‘It’s a pity I let the Zhangs know that I was going to talk to you about this,’ she said.
‘Now if you don’t do this favour for them, they will never believe that it is because
you haven’t the time or don’t want the money; they will take it as a sign that you are
not able.’
This put Xi-feng on her mettle.
‘You’ve known me a long time,’ she said. ‘You know that I’ve never believed all that
talk about hell and damnation. If I decide that I want to do something I do it, no
matter what it is. Tell them that if they are prepared to pay out three thousand taels
of silver, I will undertake to relieve them of their trouble.’
The prioress was delighted.
‘They will! They will! No doubt about it!’
‘Mind you,’ said Xi-feng, ‘I’m not one of your money-grubbing run-of-the-mill
go-betweens. I’m not doing this for the money. Every bit of this three thousand taels
will go into the pockets of my boys or towards their expenses. I shan’t touch a penny
of it. If it was money I wanted, I could lay my hands on thirty thousand taels at this
very moment.’
‘Well, that’s nicely settled!’ said the prioress. ‘So can we lo6k forward to your kind
help in this matter tomorrow? We may as well get it over and done with.’
‘You can see how busy I am and how impossible it is for me to get away,’ said
Xi-feng. ‘I’ve told you I’ll do it, and so I will -- in my own time. Surely that is enough
for you?’
‘A little thing like this might seem a great deal of trouble to some people;’ said the
old nun artfully, ‘but even if it involved more than it does, it would still be nothing to
a capable person like you, Mrs Lian. You know what they say: “The able man gets
little leisure” that’s why Her Ladyship leaves everything to you. She knows how
capable you are. Of course, you have to be careful that you don’t overtax yourself.
Your health is precious!’
Soothed by such flatteries, Xi-feng forgot her weariness, and the conversation
continued with animation.
Meanwhile Qin Zhong had taken advantage of the darkness and the fact that there
was no one much about to prosecute his designs on Sapientia. He found her on her
own in one of the rooms at the back of the priory washing up tea-things. Throwing
his arms around her from behind, he gave her a kiss. Sapientia stamped with
vexation:
‘What are you doing? Stop it!’
She was about to call out, but Qin Zhong spoke entreat?ingly:
‘Darling Sappy! I want you so desperately! If you won’t let me, I’ll just lie down and
die!’
‘If you want me,’ said Sapientia, ‘you must first get me out of this hole and away
from these people. Then you can do what you like.’
‘That’s easy,’ said Qin Zhong. ‘But “distant water is no cure for a present thirst” ...’
And with that he blew out the light, plunging the room into inky darkness, and
carried Sapientia on to the kang. She struggled hard to get up—though still not
daring to call out; but soon, almost before she knew it, her breech-clout was off and
the ship was in the harbour.
Suddenly, in less time than it takes to tell, a third person bore down on them from
above and held them fast. The intruder made no sound, and for some moments the
other two lay underneath his weight, half dead with fright. Then there was a splutter
of suppressed laughter and they knew that it was Bao-yu.
‘What do you think you’re playing at?’ said Qin Zhong crossly, as he scrambled to
his feet.
‘If you won’t let me, darling,’ Bao-yu mimicked, ‘I’ll call Out!’
Poor Sapientia was so overcome with shame that she slipped away in the dark.
Bao-yu hauled Qin Zhong from the room.
‘Now,’ he said: ‘are you still going to pretend that Sappy means nothing to you?’
‘Look, be a good chap! I’ll do anything you say as long as you promise not to shout.’
‘We won’t say any more about it just now,’ said Bao-yu genially. ‘Wait until we are
both in bed and I’ll settle accounts with you then.’
Bedtime soon came and they partially undressed and settled down for the night,
Xi-feng in an inner room and Bao-yu and Qin Zhong in an outer room adjoining it. As
there were numerous old women on night duty lying about everywhere on the floor
wrapped up in their bedding, Xi-feng was afraid that the ‘Magic Jade’ might
disappear in the course of the night; so as soon as Bao-yu was in bed she sent
someone to fetch it from him, and put it under her own pillow for safety.
As for the ‘settling of accounts’ that Bao-yu had proposed to Qin Zhong, we have
been unable to ascertain exactly what form this took; and as we would not for the
world be guilty of a fabrication, we must allow the matter to remain a mystery.
Next day someone arrived from Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang to see how Bao-yu
was getting on. He was coun?selled to dress up well against the cold and to come
back home if there was nothing further to do. Bao-yu was most unwilling to return
on his own account, and his unwillingness was re?inforced by the promptings of Qin
Zhong, who was anxious to see more of Sapientia and urged him to ask Xi-feng for
another day.
Xi-feng reflected a little. The main business of the funeral was now over, but a
sufficient number of minor matters still remained to be done to justify their staying
on another day if they wanted to. Three arguments in favour of staying presented
themselves to her mind:
1.It would be a gesture of considerateness to Cousin Zhen which would increase his
indebtedness to her.
     2.It would give her a breathing-space in which to get Euergesia’s business
attended to.
3.It would make Bao-yu happy, which would put her in good odour with
Grandmother Jia.
Having now made her mind up, Xi-feng acceded to Bao-yu’s request in the following
terms:
‘My own business here is all finished now, but if you want to amuse yourselves a bit
longer, I suppose I must resign myself to staying. However, we definitely must go back
tomorrow.’
When Bao-yu heard this it was all ‘dearest Feng’ this and ‘darling Feng’ that, and he
promised faithfully to return on the morrow without demur. Accordingly it was
settled that they should stay for one more night.
Xi-feng immediately sent someone in great secrecy to explain Euergesia’s business to
Brightie. Brightie grasped the situation at once, hurried into town, sought out a
public letter-writer, had a letter written in Jia Lian’s name to the captain’s
commanding officer, and set off for Chang-an over?night bearing the spurious
missive with him.
     Chang-an is only thirty or 50 miles from the capital, so that Brightie could finish
his business and be back again within a couple of days. The general’s name was Yun
Guang. He was indebted to the Jia family for a number of past kindnesses and was
only too ‘pleased to be of service to them in a matter of such trifling importance. He
said as much in the letter of reply which he gave Brightie to carry back with him. But
that part of his mission is omitted from our story.
When their second day at the priory was over, Xi-feng and the boys took leave of
Euergesia, and as she said good-bye, Xi-feng told the prioress to call at the Rong-guo
mansion m two days’ time to hear the news from Chang-an.
This parting was an unbearably painful one for Sapientia and Qin Zhong, and all sorts
of secret vows were exchanged and whispered contracts made before they could tear
them?selves apart. We omit all details of that harrowing scene.
Xi-feng called in at the Temple of the Iron Threshold on the way back to see that
everything was in order. jewel, it seemed, refused absolutely to go back home, and
Cousin Zhen was obliged to leave a woman or two at the temple to keep her
company.
Their return, and the events which followed it, will be dealt with in the following
chapter.

CHAPTER 16
Jia Yuan-chun is selected for g1orious promotion
to the Imperial Bedchamber
And Qin Zhong is summoned for premature departure
on the journey into Night



Xi-feng, Qin Zhong and Bao-yu, as we have said, called in at the Temple of the Iron
Threshold on their way home. After looking round for a while, the three of them got
back into their carriage and continued their journey into the city. Home once more,
they first called on Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang and then went off to their
several rooms. But of the rest of that day and the night which followed, our story
says nothing.
Next morning Bao-yu found that his outer study had now been finished and was
ready for use. He looked forward to beginning night-work in it with Qin Zhong, in
accordance with a promise they had made each other. But unfortunately Qin Zhong’s
always sickly constitution had been much neglected during their two-day excursion
into the country, and the unwonted exposure to wind and cold and immoderate
indulgence in secret frolic with Sapientia had resulted on his return in a cough and
chill accompanied by total loss of appetite. Altogether he presented so sorry a
spectacle that study was quite out of the question and they were obliged to send him
back home to bed. Although Bao-yu was very dis?appointed, there was nothing at all
he could do but wait for his friend to get better.
Xi-feng had now received Yun Guang’s reply to the bogus letter, expressing his
readiness to comply with her (or, as he supposed, Jia Lian’s) request. Euergesia
communicated this information to the Zhangs; and soon the captain, swallowing his
anger and resentment as best he could, was obliged to receive back the betrothal
gifts he had sent them on behalf of his son. But Jin-ge possessed a far nobler spirit
than might have been expected in the daughter of such mercenary parents. On
learning that her affianced had been sent packing, she quietly went off and hanged
herself in her scarf. The captain’s son, too, turned out to be a young person of
unexpectedly romantic notions, for on hearing that Jin-ge had hanged her?self, he
promptly threw himself into a river and was drowned. The Zhangs and the Lis were
thus left in a very unenviable situation:


‘the maid and eke the money gone’

in the words of the poet. The only gainer was Xi-feng, who now had three thousand
taels of silver to sit back and enjoy at her leisure. Not an inkling of this affair reached
the ears of Lady Wang.
Emboldened by this taste of success, Xi-feng from now on undertook many more
ventures of a similar nature -- far more than we could give an account of in this
history.
*
The day of Jia Zheng’s birthday arrived and all the members of the Ning-guo and
Rong-guo households were gathered together to celebrate it. Just as the festivities
were at their height, one of the janitors from the main gate burst in on the
assembled company:
‘The Master of the Imperial Bedchamber Mr Xia is on his way, sir, with an
announcement from His Majesty the Emperor!’
Jia She, Jia Zheng and the rest were taken completely by surprise, quite unable to
guess what the meaning of this visitation could be. Hurriedly giving orders for the
players to halt their performance and for all traces of the feast to be cleared away,
they caused a table with burning incense (which would be required for the reading of
the Proclamation, if there was one) to beset down in its place. Then, throwing open
the centre of the three main gates, they knelt down in the entrance of the mansion
to receive their visitor.
Soon Xia Bing-zhong, the Eunuch Master of the Bedchamber, arrived on horseback
with a retinue of eunuchs at his back. He appeared to have no Imperial Proclamation
or other document on his person, for instead of dismounting, as etiquette prescribed
that he should if he was carrying a Written Instrument, he rode straight on to the
foot of the main hall. There, with beaming countenance, he got down from his horse,
climbed the steps, faced south and gave utterance to the following announcement:
‘By order of His Imperial Majesty:
Jia Zheng is commanded to present himself at court im?mediately for private
audience with His Imperial Majesty in the Hall of Reverence.’
Having delivered this message he got straight back on to his horse without staying for
so much as a cup of tea and rode away. Still no wiser, Jia Zheng hurried into his court
dress and hastened to the Palace, leaving Grandmother Jia and the rest in an extreme
state of alarm which they endeavoured (unsuccessfully) to allay by dispatching a
regular stream of mounted couriers post-haste to the Palace to inquire for news.
About four hours later Lai Da, the Chief Steward of the Rong-guo mansion, and three
or four other stewards came panting into the inner gate and gasped out
congratulations.
‘Master’s orders,’ said Lai Da between breaths: ‘will Her Old Ladyship please bring
Their Ladyships to the Palace to give thanks to His Majesty for the great favour he has
shown us!’
Unable in her agitated state to remain indoors, Grandmother Jia had been waiting
outside in the loggia, whither the others --Lady Xing, Lady Wang, You-shi, Li Wan,
Xi-feng, Aunt Xue and the girls -- had also congregated to await news of Jia Zheng.
Grandmother Jia called Lai Da inside to explain his cryptic message in somewhat
greater detail.
‘We servants were all waiting in an anteroom,’ Lai Da told her, ‘and we had no idea
what was going on inside. Eventually Mr. Xia came out and saw us waiting there.
“Congratulations!” he said. “Your eldest young lady has been appointed Chief
Secretary to the Empress and is to become an Imperial Concubine.” Then after that
Master came out, too, and told us the same thing. “I have to go off to the East Palace
now,” he said, “to see the Prince. But you must hasten back as quick as you can and
tell Their Ladyships to come to the Palace and give thanks.”‘
Lai’s Da information at once dispelled the anxiety that Grandmother Jia and the
others had all this time been feeling, and the worried looks on their faces quickly
gave way to smiles of pleasure. Now a great dressing-up began as each lady robed
herself in the costume appropriate to her rank. Then off they went to the Palace in
four sedans one behind the other: Grand?mother Jia’s at the head, then Lady Xing’s,
then Lady Wang’s, and then You-shi’s. Jia She and Cousin Zhen also changed into
court dress, and taking Jia Rong and Jia Qiang with them, accompanied Grandmother
Jia to the Palace as her male escort.
There was one person who did not share the unbounded delight now general among
the members of the Ning-guo and Rong-guo households—who behaved, indeed,
almost as if he had not heard the news at all. This person was Bao-yu. What was the
reason for his unsociable lack of enthusiasm on this occasion?
A short time previously the little nun Sapientia had ab?sconded from Water-moon
Priory and made her way into the city to look for Qin Zhong. Qin Bang-ye had
discovered her, driven her from the house, and given Qin Zhong a beating. The shock
and anger of the discovery had brought on an attack of the illness from which the old
gentleman was a chronic sufferer, and within only four or five days he had breathed
his last. Qin Zhong had always been of a weak and nervous disposition and had still
not fully recovered from his sickness when these events occurred. The severe beating
followed by the overwhelming grief and remorse attendant on the death of his father
from anger which he had himself provoked led to serious complications in his illness.
This, then, was the reason for Bao-yu’s unseasonable melancholy—a melancholy
which the news of his sister Yuan?-chun’s dazzling promotion was powerless to dispel.
Grand?mother Jia’s visit to the Palace to give thanks, her return home, the visits of
friends and relations to congratulate the family, the unwontedly cheerful bustle of
the Ning and Rong households during the days that followed, the general
satisfac?tion that everyone in those households now seemed to feel—as far as
Bao-yu was concerned these things might just as well not have been: he viewed them
with the eyes of an outsider. The rest of the family merely laughed at him, seeing in
this be?haviour only further confirmation of their belief that he was ‘a bit touched’.
But then there was Jia Lian’s and Dai-yu’s homecoming to look forward to. The
advent of the messenger sent on ahead to announce that they would be arriving next
day produced the first glimmer of cheerfulness that Bao-yu had so far shown. On
being questioned for further details the messenger told them that Jia Yu-cun was also
returning to the capital to have an audience with the Emperor. This was the doing of
Wang Zi-teng, who had recommended him in a report to the throne for promotion to
a metropolitan post. As he was both a cousin (albeit a remote one) of. Jia Lian and
also Dai-yu’s former teacher, it had been resolved that he should travel with them.
Lin Ru-hai having been laid with his ancestors in the family burying-ground and his
obsequies duly concluded, they would, if they had proceeded to the capital by the
usual stages, have been arriving back some time in the following month; but when Jia
Lian heard the news about Yuan-chun’s elevation, they had decided to make greater
speed, travelling by night as well as by day. The journey had been smooth and
uneventful.
Bao-yu merely asked if Dai-yu was all right, and on being assured that she was, paid
no further attention to the man’s news.
Having waited with great impatience until the early afternoon of the following day,
Bao-yu and the rest were rewarded with the announcement ‘Mr Lian and Miss Lin
have just arrived!’ The joy of their reunion was, however, tempered with grief,
because of the two deaths that had occurred since their parting, and for a while
there was much loud weeping on either side. Then there were words of comfort and
congratula?tion to exchange and Bao-yu had an opportunity of studying Dai-yu more
carefully. He recognized the same ethereal quality he had always known in her, but it
seemed to have deepened and intensified during her absence.
She had brought a lot of books back with her and was soon busy superintending the
sweeping out of her bedroom to accommodate them and arranging various objets
d’art around it which had also formed part of her luggage. She had salvaged some
paper, writing-brushes and other articles of stationery from her old home which she
distributed as presents to Bao-chai, Ying-chun, Bao-yu and the rest. Bao-yu for his
part hunted up the rosary of fragrant Indian beads given him by the Prince of Bei-jing
and offered it as a gift to Dai-yu; but she flung it back at him disdainfully:
‘What, carry a thing that some coarse man has pawed over? I don’t want it!’
So Bao-yu was compelled to take it back again.
But let us now turn to Jia Lian.
When he had finished seeing everyone in the family, Jia Lian returned at last to his
own apartment. Xi-feng, though still so busy that she had not a moment’s leisure,
had somehow contrived to find time to welcome back her wandering lord.
‘Congratulations, Imperial Kinsman!’ she said with a smile when, except for the
servants, they were at last alone together. ‘You have had a tiring journey, Imperial
Kinsman. Yesterday when the courier gave notice of your arrival, I prepared a humble
entertainment to celebrate your homecoming. Will the Imperial Kinsman graciously
condescend to take a cup of wine with his handmaid?’
Jia Lian replied in the same vein:
‘Madam, you are too kind! I am your most oble-e-eged and humble servant,
ma’am!’
As they joked together, Patience and the other maids came forward to welcome their
Master back, after which they served them both with tea. Jia Lian asked Xi-feng
about the events that had occurred during his absence and thanked her for looking
after things so well while he was away.
‘I am not much of a manager really,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I haven’t got the knowledge, and
I’m too poor at expressing myself and too simple-minded --- always inclined to “take
a ramrod for a needle”, as they say. Besides, I’m too soft-hearted for the job. Anyone
who says a few kind words can get the better of me. And my lack of experience
makes me so nervous. Aunt Wang only had to be the slightest bit displeased and I
would get so upset that I couldn’t sleep at night. I begged her not to make me do all
these things, but she insisted. She said I only refused out of laziness and
unwillingness to learn. I don’t think she realizes even now the state I have been in—
too seated to move or even to open my mouth for fear of saying or doing something
wrong. And you know what a difficult lot those old stewardesses are. The tiniest
mistake and they are all laughing at you and making fun; the tiniest hint of
favouritism and they are grumbling and complaining. You know their way of “cursing
the oak-tree when they mean the ash”. Those old women know just how to sit on the
mountain-top and watch the tigers fight; how to murder with a borrowed knife, or
help the wind to fan the fire. They will look on safely from the bank while you are
drowning in the river. And the fallen oil-bottle can drain away: they are not going to
pick it up. On top of that, as I am so young, I haven’t got much authority over them;
so it was all I could do to prevent them from ignoring me altogether. And to crown it
all, when Rong’s wife died Cousin Zhen kept coming round to see Aunt Wang and
begging her on his knees to let me help out for a day or two next door. I said again
and again that I couldn’t do it; but Aunt Wang agreed just to please him, so there was
nothing for it but to do as I was told. I’m afraid I made a terrible mess of it—even
worse than I did here. And now it seems Cousin Zhen is beginning to grumble and
says he wishes he had never asked me. When you see him tomorrow, do please try to
make it up with him. Tell him it’s because I’m young and inexperienced. You might
even hint that it’s his own fault for having asked me in the first place!’
While she was saying this there was a sound of talking in the next room.
‘Who is it?’ said Xi-feng.
Patience came in to reply.
‘Mrs. Xue sent Caltrop over to ask me about something. I’ve already given her an
answer and sent her back.’
‘Ah yes!’ said Jia Lian, apparently pleased by the recollec?tion. ‘When I went to call
on Aunt Xue just now to tell her I was back, I ran into such a pretty young woman! I
couldn’t place her as any of the girls in our household, so in the course of
conversation I asked Aunt Xue who she was. It seems that she’s the little maid they
had that lawsuit about. Cal—something. Caltrop. She’s finally been given as
“chamber-wife” to that idiot Xue, Now that she has been plucked and painted like a
grown-up woman she really does look most attractive! What a waste to throw away a
beautiful girl on that great booby!’
Xi-feng made a little moue.
‘I should have thought that having just got back from Hangchow and Soochow and
seen something of the world, you would have settled down a bit; but I see you are
still the same greedy-guts as ever. Well, if you want her, there’s nothing simpler: I’ll
exchange our Patience for her. You know what Cousin Xue is like: always “one eye on
the dish and the other on the saucepan”. Throughout the whole of this last year
there have been I don’t know how many alarms and excursions between him and
poor Aunt Xue because she wouldn’t let him get his hands on Caltrop. It wasn’t just
her looks that made her concerned for the girl. Everything about her is so unusual.
She is so gentle and so quiet. Even among our own young ladies there is scarcely her
equal. In the end Aunt Xue decided that if she couldn’t stop him having her, at least
she could make sure that the thing was done properly, with a party and invitations
and all the rest of it. So that’s what she did, and made her his chamber wife. But
would you believe it, before a fortnight had gone by he had completely lost
interest. . .!’
She was interrupted by an announcement from one of the pages on the inner gate:
‘Mr Zhen wants you, sir. He’s waiting for you in the larger study.’
At once jia Lian did up his gown and hurried out.
‘What on earth did Mrs. Xue want, sending Caltrop here like that?’ Xi-feng asked
Patience as soon as he had gone.
‘It wasn’t Caltrop!’ said Patience. ‘I had to make something up and hers was the
first name that came to mind. That wife of Brightie’s is such a stupid woman! Just
imagine’—she drew closer to Xi-feng’s ear and lowered her voice—‘of all the times
she could have chosen to bring you the interest on that money, she had to pick on
the very moment when the Master has just got home! It’s lucky I was in the outside
room when she came, otherwise she might have come blundering in here and
Master would have heard her message. And we all know what Master is like where
money is concerned: he’d spend the fat in the frying-pan if he could get it out! Once
he found out that you had savings, he’d pluck up courage to spend them in no time.
Anyway, I took the money from her quickly and gave her a piece of my mind -- which
I am afraid you must have heard. That’s why I had to say what I did. I’d never have
men?tioned Caltrop in the Master’s presence otherwise!’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘I was going to say! Why, for no apparent reason, should Mrs. Xue choose a
chamber-wife to send here the moment Master gets back? So it was you up to your
tricks, you little monkey!’
At this point Jia Lian came in again and Xi-feng ordered her maids to serve the wine
and various choice dishes to go with it. Husband and wife sat cross-legged at
opposite sides of the low table on the kang and began their drinking—Xi-feng with
some restraint, although she was normally a fairly hard drinker, in view of the
occasion.
They had not been drinking long when Jia Lian’s old wet-nurse, Nannie Zhao, walked
in. The young couple at once invited her to drink with them and tried to make her
join them on the kang. This last honour she would under no circumstances accept,
and Patience and the girls laid a little table for her at the side of the kang and set a
little stool beside it, on which she sat down very contentedly. Jia Lian made a
selection with his chopsticks from the dishes on the table, and after heaping up two
platefuls, set them down on Nannie Zhao’s own little table for her to eat there by
herself. Xi-feng was critical:
‘Nannie can’t chew stuff like that. She’ll break her teeth on it!’ She turned to
Patience. ‘That piece of boiled gammon in the bowl I said this morning was so tender:
that would be just the thing for Nannie. Why don’t you run round to the kitchen and
ask them to heat it up for her?— Nannie,’ she said, addressing the old woman, ‘you.
must try some of the rice wine your Lian brought back with him from the South!’
‘Ooh yes!’ said Nannie Zhao, ‘I must try some of that! And you must have some too,
Mrs. Lian. Never fear! As long as you don’t drink too much, ’ twill do you good. But I
didn’t come all the way here for vittles and drink, bless you. I came on more serious
business. And you heed my words, Mrs. Lian, and stick up for me; because that
Master Lian of yours he always says he’ll do something, but when you go to see him
later, he’s clean forgot all about it! To think I reared you up on the milk of my own
bosom, Master Lian! And a fine young man you’ve growed into, thanks be! Well, I’m
old and of no account now. But there are these two sons of mine, d’ye see? If only
you would be more like a foster-brother to theta and look after them a bit, no one
would dare say a word agen them. But dearie me! I’ve asked you again and again to
help them, and you always says yes; yet to this very day nothing has ever come of it.
Well, what I thought was this, Mrs Lian. With this great blessing of Heaven that’s
come on the family on account of your eldest young lady, surely, I thought to myself,
there must be jobs in this for someone? I’ll talk to Mrs Lian about it, I said to myself;
because if I rely on Master Lian to help us, we’ll starve to death for certain sure!’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘Leave your two boys to me, Nannie. I’ll look after them! You know all about Lian’s
little ways because you nursed him when he was a baby: he’ll give the dearest thing
he has to some nobody he’s picked up outside, yet his own two foster-brothers who
are much nicer young men than any of his favourites he neglects completely. If only
you would take a bit of interest in them, Lian, you wouldn’t hear a word of complaint
from anyone, instead of wasting your kindnesses on those -- those little male misses
of yours! I shouldn’t have called them “misses”, though. You treat the misses as your
missus and give me the miss! ’
There was a loud laugh from everyone present, including Nannie Zhao, who
concluded her cackles with a pious invoca?tion:
‘Bless his Holy Name! Here at last comes a just judge to set all things to rights -- But
oh Mrs Lian, those naughty things you said about “misses”: that’s not my Master Lian.
It’s just that he’s so soft-hearted he can’t bring himself to say “ no” to anyone who
spins him a tale.’
‘Soft-hearted with his boy friends, maybe,’ said Xi-feng with a lubricious smile; ‘but
when he has to do with us women he is hard enough.’
‘Tee, hee, hee, what a one you are, Mrs Lian! I don’t know when I was last so merry.
Come on, let’s have another cup of that good wine! — Now that I’ve got Mrs Lian to
stand up for me I shall have no more worries!’
Jia Lian was by now thoroughly embarrassed and laughed sheepishly.
‘Stop all this nonsense now and serve the rice! I’ve still got to go round to Cousin
Zhen’s after this to discuss things.’
‘Ah yes,’ said Xi-feng. ‘We mustn’t make you late for that. What did Cousin Zhen
want you for just now?’
‘It was about the visitation business,’ said Jia Lian.
‘Has it been settled, then?’
‘Well, not absolutely. Eight or nine parts settled, you might say.’
‘That’s a great favour of the Emperor’s, isn’t it?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Something you don’t
hear of even in plays and stories about the olden days.’
‘Very true!’ chimed in Nannie Zhao. ‘But I must be getting old and stupid, for
everywhere these last few days have been a-buzz with talk of “visitations”, but
blessed if I can make head or tall of it. You tell us now: just what manner of thing is
this “visitation”?’
Jia Lian undertook to do so.
‘Our present Emperor, who has always had a great sym?pathy for the common man,
believes that the filial affection of a child for its parents is the most important thing in
the world, and that family feeling is the same everywhere, irrespective of social rank.
He has found that in his own case, even after see?ing the Ex-Emperor and
Ex-Empress morning, noon and night every day of his life, he is still unable to express
more than a fraction of the devotion he feels for them; and this has led him to think
of all those concubines and maids of honour and other court ladies, taken from their
homes and shut up in the Palace for years and years on end, and to realize how much
they must miss their parents. And from there he got to thinking of the parents
themselves, how they must long for the daughters they can never see again. And
then he thought what a crime against Nature it would be if any of those parents were
to become ill as a result of not seeing their daughters. And so he addressed a
Memorial to the Ex-Emperor and Ex-Empress requesting permission to allow the
families of palace ladies to visit them in the Palace on the twelfth day of every month.
When Their Old Majesties saw this Memorial they were very pleased and praised the
Emperor for his piety and goodness—“doing Heaven’s work among men” they called
it. But they pointed out in their Rescript that when the families of court ladies
entered the Palace on these visits, they would inevitably be hampered by the
restrictions of court etiquette in the ex?pression of their natural feelings. So in the
end, by an act of supreme generosity, the Emperor issued a special decree in which
he said that, apart from allowing the families of court ladies to visit their daughters in
the Palace on the twelfth day of each month, he would allow any family which had a
separate house or annexe capable of being maintained in the degree of security
specified for a temporary Imperial Residence to make written application for
permission to receive a Visitation in their own home, where the pleasures of reunion
could be enjoyed in an atmosphere of intimacy and affection. The proclamation of
this decree has created quite a stir. The Imperial Concubine Lady Zhou’s father
already has the builders at work on a special wing for visitations in his house, and
Lady Wu’s father, Wu Tian-you, has been outside the city looking for a site. So it’s
already eight or nine parts settled, as I said.’
‘Bless my soul!’ said Nannie Zhao. ‘So that’s what it is! Well, I suppose in that case
we shall soon be getting ready to receive our young lady?’
‘Of course,’ said Jia Lian. ‘What else do you think we’re all so busy about?’
‘ If we do receive her,’ said Xi-feng, ‘it should be an ex?perience worth
remembering. I’ve often wished I’d been born twenty or thirty years earlier so that
the old folk wouldn’t be able to look down on me for having missed so much. To hear
them talk about the Emperor Tai-zu’s Southern Progress is better than listening to a
story-teller. How I wish I’d been there to see it all!’
‘Ah, now!’ said Nannie Zhao. ‘That’s the sort of thing that scarce comes once in a
thousand years! I was not so young then that I can’t still remember. The head of the
Jia family in those days was Superintendant of Shipyards and Harbour Maint’nance in
the Soochow-Yangchow area and was chosen to receive the Emperor on one of his
visits. The way they spent silver on that visit, why, it was like pouring out salt sea
water! I call to mind...’
Xi-feng in her eagerness cut her short:
‘We Wangs received the Emperor on one of his visits, too. At that time my
grandfather was in charge of all the foreign tribute and the embassies going up to
Court. Whenever any foreigners arrived, it was always my family that put them up.
All the goods brought by the foreign ships to the seaports in Kwangtung, Fukien,
Yunnan and Chekiang passed through our hands.’
‘Everybody knows that,’ said Nannie Zhao. ‘There’s even a rhyme about it:

The King of the Ocean
Goes along,
When he’s short of gold beds,
To the Nanking Wang.

That’s your family: the “Nanking Wangs”. But then there’s the Zhens, who still live
down that way in Kiangnan. My word! There’s riches for you! That family alone
received the Emperor four times! If I hadn’t seen with my own two eyes, I don’t care
who told me, I wouldn’t have credited it, the sights I saw then! Never mind silver.
Silver was just dirt to them. Every precious thing in the world you can think of they
had there in moun?tains! Words like “save” and “spare” they just didn’t seem to
know the meaning of!’
‘I believe you,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ve heard my grandfather talk about it, and he said it
was just like that. But it still amazes me that a single family could have so much
wealth.’
‘I’ll tell you something, Mrs Lian,’ said the knowledgeable Nannie. “Twere no more
than paying for the Emperor’s entertainment with the Emperor’s own silver. No
family that ever lived had money enough of its own to pay for such spectacles of
vanity!’
While they were chatting, Lady Wang sent someone round to see if Xi-feng had
finished her dinner yet. Xi-feng realized that there must be something which
demanded her attention and, finishing hurriedly, rinsed out her mouth and prepared
to go. Before she could leave, however, the pages from the second gate announced
the arrival of Jia Rong and Jia Qiang from the Ning-guo mansion next door. Jia Lian
had just finished rinsing his mouth and was washing his hands in a basin held out for
him by Patience when the two young men came into the room.
‘What is your message?’ he asked them.
Xi-feng, curious, stayed to hear.
‘Father sent us to tell you that the uncles have already reached a decision,’ said Jia
Rong. ‘They have measured off an area just over a quarter of a mile square which
takes in a part of our grounds, including the All-scents Garden, on the east side, and
the north-west corner of your grounds on the west, to be turned into a Separate
Residence for the Visitation. They’ve already commissioned someone to draw a plan,
which should be ready tomorrow. Father says as you’ve just got home he’s sure you
must be tired, so don’t bother to come round tonight. If there’s anything to discuss,
you can tell him about it first thing tomorrow.’
‘Thank your father for me very much,’ said Jia Lian with a grateful smile. ‘It is very
good of him to let me off tonight, and I shall do as he says and not go over until
tomorrow. I think the great advantage of this proposal is that it is so economical and
makes the job of construction so much easier. It would mean very much more
trouble if we were to build on land out?side, yet at the same time we should lose the
convenience this present scheme gives us of a single layout. Tell him when you get
back that I think it is an excellent proposal, and that I leave it to him to protest in any
way he thinks fit if the others show signs of going back on it. The one thing we must
under no circumstances do is to go looking for land outside. Anyway, I shall be round
to see him first thing tomorrow and we can talk about it in detail then.’
Jia Rong promised to retail this message.
Jia Qiang now stepped forward with a message of his own:
‘Uncle Zhen has given me the job of going to Soochow to engage music and drama
teachers and to buy girl players and instruments and costumes so that we can have
our own theatricals for the visitation. I’m to take Lai Sheng’s two sons with me; and
two of Great-uncle Zheng’s gentlemen, Dan Ping-ren and Bu Gu-xiu, are coming as
well. Uncle said I ought to have a word with you about it before I go.’
Jia Lian looked the youth up and down appraisingly and laughed:
‘Do you think you are qualified for the job? It may not be a very big one, but I
should say the pickings would be pretty good for someone who knew the ropes.’
Jia Qiang laughed too.
‘I shall have to learn as I go along!’
Jia Rong, who was standing somewhat away. From the light, availed himself of the
shadow’s concealment to give Xi-feng’s dress a surreptitious tug. She understood
perfectly well what his meaning was, but pretended not to, dismissing him with a
curt wave of the hand and addressing herself instead to Jia Lian:
‘Don’t be so officious, Lian! Cousin Zhen is no less capable of choosing the right
person for the job than we are. What do you mean by asking the boy if he’s qualified?
He’s as much qualified as any of the rest of us. He’s old enough to have seen a pig run,
even if he’s not old enough to have eaten pork! In any case, I’m sure Cousin Zhen
only chose him as a figurehead. You don’t seriously suppose that he’ll be the one to
discuss prices and deal with the business side of the expedition? — I think myself it’s
a very good choice!’
‘Of course it is,’ said Jia Lian. ‘I don’t dispute it. I merely thought we ought to do a
few of his sums for him before he goes. Where is the money for this coming from?’
he asked Jia Qiang.
‘We were discussing that just now,’ said Jia Qiang. ‘Gaffer Lai says that there’s no
point in taking money with us from here. He says the Zhens of Kiangnan hold fifty
thousand taels of ours on deposit and he can give us a letter of credit to take to them
when we go. We’ll draw out thirty thousand first and leave the rest to buy lanterns,
lamps, and curtains with later on.’
Jia Lian nodded appreciatively.
‘Good idea.’
‘Well, if that’s all settled,’ Xi-feng put in quickly, ‘I’ve got two very reliable young
men for you to take with you, Qiang. I’m sure you’ll find them extremely useful.’
‘What a coincidence!’ said Jia Qiang. ‘I was just about to ask if you could
recommend a couple of helpers!’
He asked for their names, and Xi-feng turned to Nannie Zhao to supply them. But the
old nurse was so bemused by all this talk of policy and high finance that she
appeared to be in a sort of coma, which it took a sharp nudge from Patience to rouse
her from. When she answered it was in a gabble, to make up for the awkward pause.
‘One of them is called Zhao Tian-liang, the other is called Zhao Tian-dong.’
‘Mind you don’t forget!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Now I’m off to see to my own affairs.’ And
she left the room.
Jia Rong slipped out after her.
‘If you will make a list of all the things you want,’ he said, smilingly and softly, ‘I’ll
see that he gets them for you, gracious lady.’
‘Gracious arsehole!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Do you think you can buy my favour with a few
knick-knacks? I don’t like all this whispering in corners.’
She walked away without giving him a chance to reply.
Meanwhile Jia Qiang was making a somewhat similar proposal to Jia Lian.
‘If there’s anything I can get for you while I’m away, Uncle, I shall be glad to wangle
it.’
‘My, my!’ said Jia Lian. ‘Let’s not get carried away, then! I must say, for one who’s
only just started, you certainly haven’t lost much time in picking up the tricks of the
trade! Yes, I dare say I shall write and let you know if I find I’m short of anything.’
With these words he sent the two young men back to the other house. Their
departure was followed by a succession of three or four visits by servants reporting
on household matters, after which he felt so exhausted that he instructed the
servants on the inner gate to refuse admittance to any others and to inform them
that he would deal with their business next day. It was midnight by the time Xi-feng
got back to bed.
But the affairs of that night are no part of our story.
Rising early next morning, Jia Lian first called on his father and uncles and then went
to the Ning-guo mansion, where, with Cousin Zhen, he joined a group consisting of
the older stewards and domestics and a few friends and clients of the family in
making a complete survey of the Ning-guo and Rong-guo properties with a view to
deciding where the various buildings of the Separate Residence should be sited. He
also helped them interview the craftsmen who would undertake the work.
After the assembling of builders and artisans the assembling of materials began: a
continuous flow of supplies converging on the site from every direction, from
precious consignments of gold, silver, copper and tin, to huge, bulky loads of
builder’s clay, timber, bricks and tiles.
Various walls, including the surrounding walls of the All? scents Garden, and some of
the garden’s pavilions were demolished so that the north-west part of the Ning-guo
property and the large open court on the north-east side of Rong-guo House were
thrown into a single site. A range of servants’ quarters on the east side of the
Rong-guo grounds had already been demolished. The Ning-guo and Rong-guo
properties had previous to this been divided by an alley-way running from north to
south between them, but as it was not a public thoroughfare, no problem as involved
in closing it and incorporating part of it in the rest of the new site.
The All-scents Garden had been watered by a stream led in by a culvert which ran
under a corner of the north wall. Now that the garden was being integrated in the
larger site, it was no longer necessary to lead the water in at this point.
The artificial hills, rocks, trees and shrubs of All-scents Garden were, of course,
insufficient for the whole of the new site; but the area occupied by Jia She was the
original garden of Rong-guo House and plentifully supplied with bamboos, trees,
rocks, pavilions, kiosks and pergolas capable of being moved elsewhere. By pooling
the resources of these two garden—the All-scents Garden of Ning-guo House and the
original Rong-guo garden where Jia She lived— and redistri?buting them over a single
area, it would be possible to make great economies in both labour and materials, and
when the estimates came to be made it was found that the requirements, in terms of
completely new materials, would be comparatively modest.
The conception as a whole and the designs for its execution were alike the work of a
well-known landscape gardener familiar to all and sundry by the sobriquet of
‘Horticultural Hu’.
Jia Zheng was unused to matters of a practical nature and left the management of
men and the control of operations to a consortium consisting of Jia She, Cousin Zhen
and Jia Lian, the stewards Lai Da, Lai Sheng and Lin Zhi-xiao, the Clerk of Stores Wu
Xin-deng, and two of his literary gentlemen, Zhan Guang and Cheng Ri-xing. The
digging of pools, the raising of hills, the sitting and erection of lodges and pavilions,
the planting of bamboos and flowers—in a word, all matters pertaining to the
landscaping and layout of the gardens, were planned and supervised by Horticultural
Hu. Jia Zheng would merely drop in occasionally when he got back from Court and
look around. On any important matters he sought the advice of Jia She and the rest.
Jia She led a life of cultured ease and never did anything. On routine matters of no
great importance Cousin Zhen would either report to him in person or send him a
brief note when the thing was done. If consultation was unavoidable, he would send
along Lai Da or one of the others for a reply.
Jia Rong’s sole task was to supervise the making of objects in gold and silver.
Jia Qiang had already left for Soochow.
Cousin Zhen, Lai Da and the rest were the ones who did most of the real work. It was
they who hired workmen, kept accounts, and supervised and inspected each job as it
was undertaken.
The amount of noise and activity generated by these opera?tions could not be
described in a few words, and for the time being we shall not attempt the task.
The family’s recent preoccupation with these important developments had released
Bao-yu from his father’s periodical quizzing about the progress of his studies.
Unfortunately the relief of mind which this would otherwise have afforded him was
displaced by a grave concern for Qin Zhong, whose sickness seemed to be daily
worsening. Under such circumstances it was impossible for him to feel happy about
anything else.
One morning, just as he had finished washing and dressing and was thinking of going
round to Grandmother Jia to ask if he might pay Qin Zhong another visit, he caught
sight of Tealeaf dodging about behind the screen wall of the inner gate and evidently
trying to catch his attention. Bao-yu hurried over to him.
‘What is it?’
‘Master Qin. He’s dying!’
Bao-yu was stunned.
‘Dying? When I saw him yesterday he seemed quite lucid. How can he be dying so
soon?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Tealeaf. ‘But that’s what the old gaffer said just now who came
round to tell me.’
Bao-yu hurried back and told Grandmother Jia. She in?structed some of the more
reliable servants to go with him and briefly admonished him before he went:
‘When you get there you may stay with him to the end, since you have been such
good friends; but you must come back as soon as it is over. Don’t hang about!’
Bao-yu hurried off to change, only to find, on re-emerging, that the carriage was still
not ready. Anxious lest he should arrive too late, he ran up and down the courtyard in
a frenzy of impatience, imploring the servants to make haste; and when it at last
arrived, he flung himself in it and drove off at great speed, hotly pursued by Li Gui,
Tealeaf and the others attend?ing him.
The house, when they reached it, appeared silent and deserted. Entering together in
a tight little knot, master and servants surged through like swarming bees to the
inner apartment at the back where Qin Zhong lay, causing great consternation among
the two aunts and half-dozen girl cousins who were tending him and who were
unable to con?ceal themselves before the advent of this masculine invasion.
At this stage Qin Zhong had already lost consciousness several times and, in
accordance with the Northern custom which forbids a sick man to breathe his last on
the kang, had some time since been lifted on to a trestle bed to die. Bao-yu gave an
involuntary cry when he saw where he was lying and broke into noisy weeping. He
was quickly restrained by Li Gui:
‘You know how delicate Master Qin is. I expect the kang was too hard for him and
they have put him here so that he can lie a bit more easy. You mustn’t cry like that or
you will make him worse!’
Bao-yu held back his sobs and drew close to his dying friend. Qin Zhong’s face was
waxen. His eyes were closed tight and he seemed to breathe with difficulty, twisting
his head from side to side on the pillow.
‘Jing-qing, old fellow! It’s me! It’s Bao-yu!’—He called him several times, but Qin
Zhong seemed unaware of his presence. Again he called:
‘It’s Bao-yu!’
In point of fact Qin Zhong’s soul had already left his body and the few faint gasps of
breath in his failing lungs were the only life that now remained in it. The ministers of
the under?world, armed with a warrant and chains to bind him with, were at that
very moment confronting him; but his soul was refusing to go quietly. Remembering
that he left no one behind him to look after his family’s affairs, and bethinking him of
poor Sapientia whose whereabouts were still unknown, he entreated them most
piteously to spare him. But the infernal visitants had no ear for his entreaties and
silenced him with angry rebuke:
‘You’re an educated young fellow: haven’t you heard the saying
If Yama calls at midnight hour
      No man can put off death till four—?

We ministers of the nether world, from the highest down to the lowest, all have
unbending iron natures and—unlike the officials of the mortal world, who are always
doing kindnesses and showing favours and inventing little tricks and dodges for
frustrating the course of justice -- we are incapable of showing partiality.’
Suddenly, above their angry shouting, Qin Zhong heard a tiny cry:
‘It’s Bao-yu!’
At once he renewed his entreaties:
‘Good gentlemen, be merciful! Give me just a moment for a few words with a very
dear friend of mine, and I’ll be back directly!’
‘What is it now?’ asked the demons. ‘What friend?’
‘I won’t deceive you, gentlemen. It’s a descendant of the Duke of Rong-guo. His
name is Bao-yu.’
‘What?’ screamed the officer in charge of the party in great alarm. He turned
angrily on his demon minions;
‘I told you we ought to let him go back for a bit, but you wouldn’t listen. Now look
what’s happened! He’s gone and called up a person full of life and health to come
here right in our midst! This is terrible!’
The demons showed signs of disarray on observing their leader to be so affected, and
there was some angry mutter?ing:
‘Yer Honour was putting on a brave enough show a short while ago. Why should
the name “Bao-yu” throw you into such a state of commotion? If you ask us, seeing
that he’s upper world and we’re lower world, there’s nothing to be afraid of. We
might just as well carry this one off now and have done with it.’
The trepidation of their leader, who was perhaps thinking more of Bao-yu’s
demon-repelling talisman than of its wearer, was far from comforted by this
reflection.
‘No! No! No!’ he shouted, and compelled them to let the soul return to its body.
With the return of his soul Qin Zhong regained conscious?ness and opened his eyes.
He could see Bao-yu standing beside him; but his throat was so choked with phlegm
that he was unable to utter a word. He could only fasten his eyes on him and slowly
shake his head. Then there was a rasping sound in his throat and he slid once more
into the dark.
What followed will be told in the following chapter.




CHAPTER 17



The inspection of the new garden becomes
a test of talent
And Rong-guo House makes itself ready for
an important visitor



Now that Qin Zhong was indisputably dead, Bao-yu wept long and bitterly, and it was
some time before Li Gui and the rest could calm him. Even after their return he
continued tearful and distressed. Grandmother Jia contributed thirty or forty taels
towards Qin Zhong’s funeral expenses and made addi?tional provision for offerings
to the dead. Bao-yu condoled and sacrificed, and on the seventh day followed his
friend’s coffin to the grave. He continued in daily grief for Qin Zhong for a very long
time afterwards. But grief cannot mend our losses, and a day did at last arrive when
he hid ceased to mourn.

*

One day Cousin Zhen came to Jia Zheng with his team of helpers to report that work
on the new garden had been completed.
‘Uncle She has already had a look,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘Now we are only waiting for
you to look round it to tell us if there is anything you think will need altering and also
to decide what inscriptions ought to be used on the boards everywhere.’
Jia Zheng reflected a while in silence.
‘These inscriptions are going to be difficult,’ he said eventually. ‘By rights, of course,
Her Grace should have the privilege of doing them herself; but she can scarcely be
expected to make them up out of her head without having seen any of the views
which they are to describe. On the other hand, if we wait until she has already visited
the garden before asking her, half the pleasure of the visit will be lost. All those
prospects and pavilions—even the rocks and trees and flowers will seem somehow
incomplete without that touch of poetry which only the written word can lend a
scene.’
‘My dear patron, you are so right,’ said one of the literary gentlemen who sat with
him. ‘But we have had an idea. The inscriptions for the various parts of the garden
obviously cannot be dispensed with; nor, equally obviously, can they be decided in
advance. Our suggestion is that we should compose provisional names and couplets
to suit the places where inscriptions are required, and have them painted on
rectangu?lar paper lanterns which can be hung up temporarily –either horizontally or
vertically as the case may be—when Her Grace comes to visit. We can ask her to
decide on the permanent names after she has inspected the garden. Is not this a
solution of the dilemma?’
‘It is indeed,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘when we look round the garden presently, we must all
try to think of words that can be used. If they seem suitable, we can keep them for
the lanterns. If not, we can call for Yu-cun to come and help us out.’
‘Your own suggestions are sure to be admirable, Sir Zheng,’ said the literary
gentlemen ingratiatingly. ‘There will be no need to call in Yu-cun.’
Jia Zheng smiled deprecatingly.
‘I am afraid it is not as you imagine. In my youth I had at best only indifferent skill in
the art of writing verses about natural objects -- birds and flowers and scenery and
the like; and now that I’m older and have to devote all my energies to official
documents and government papers, I am even more out of touch with this sort of
thing than I was then; so that even if I were to try my hand at it, I fear that my efforts
would be rather dull and pedantic ones. Instead of enhancing the interest and beauty
of the garden, they would probably have a deadening effect upon both.’
‘That doesn’t matter,’ the literary gentlemen replied. ‘We can all try our hands at
composing. If each of us contributes what he is best at, and if we then select the
better attempts and reject the ones that are not so good, we should be able to
manage all right.’
‘That seems to me a very good suggestion,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘As the weather today is
so warm and pleasant, let us all go and take a turn round the garden now!’
So saying he rose to his feet and conducted his little retinue of literary luminaries
towards the garden. Cousin Zhen hurried on ahead to warn those in charge that they
were coming.
As Bao-yu was still in very low spirits these days because of his grief for Qin Zhong,
Grandmother Jia had hit on the idea of sending him into the newly made garden to
play. By un?lucky chance she had selected this very day on which to try out her
antidote. He had in fact only just entered the garden when Cousin Zhen came
hurrying towards him.
‘Better get out of here!’ said Cousin Zhen with an amused smile. ‘Your father will
be here directly!’
Bao-ya streaked back towards the gate, a string of nurses and pages hurrying at his
heels. But he had only just turned the corner on coming out of it when he almost ran
into the arms of Jia Zheng and his party coming from the opposite direction. Escape
was impossible. He simply had to stand meekly to one side and await instructions.
Jia Zheng had recently received a favourable report on Bao-yu from his teacher Jia
Dai-ru in which mention had been made of his skill in composing couplets. Although
the boy showed no aptitude for serious study, Dai-ru had said, he nevertheless
possessed a certain meretricious talent for versi?fication not undeserving of
commendation. Because of this report, Jia Zheng ordered Bao-yu to accompany him
into the garden, intending to put his aptitude to the test. Bao-yu, who knew nothing
either of Dai-ru’s report or of his father’s in?tentions, followed with trepidation.
As soon as they reached the gate they found Cousin Zhen at the head of a group of
overseers waiting to learn Jia Zheng’s wishes.
‘I want you to close the gate,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘so that we can see what it looks like
from outside before we go in.’
Cousin Zhen ordered the gate to be closed, and Jia Zheng stood back and studied it
gravely.
It was a five-frame gate-building with a hump-backed roof of half-cylinder tiles. The
wooden lattice-work of the doors and windows was finely carved and ingeniously
patterned. The whole gatehouse was quite unadorned by colour or gild?ing, yet all
was of the most exquisite workmanship. Its walls stood on a terrace of white marble
carved with a pattern of passion-flowers in relief, and the garden’s whitewashed
circumference wall to left and right of it had a footing made of black-and-white
striped stone blocks arranged so that the stripes formed a simple pattern. Jia Zheng
found the unosten?tatious simplicity of this entrance greatly to his liking, and after
ordering the gates to be opened, passed on inside.
A cry of admiration escaped them as they entered, for there, immediately in front of
them, screening everything else from their view, rose a steep, verdure-clad hill.
‘Without this hill,’ Jia Zheng somewhat otiosely observed, ‘the whole garden would
be visible as one entered, and all its mystery would be lost.’
The literary gentlemen concurred. ‘Only a master of the art of landscape could have
conceived so bold a stroke,’ said one of them.
As they gazed at this miniature mountain, they observed a great number of large
white rocks in all kinds of grotesque and monstrous shapes, rising course above
course up one of its sides, some recumbent, some upright or leaning at angles, their
surfaces streaked and spotted with moss and lichen or half concealed by creepers,
and with a narrow, zigzag path only barely discernible to the eye winding up between
them.
‘Let us begin our tour by following this path,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘If we work our way
round towards the other side of the hill on our way back, we shall have made a
complete circuit of the garden.’
He ordered Cousin Zhen to lead the way, and leaning on Bao-yu’s shoulder, began the
winding ascent of the little mountain. Suddenly on the mountainside above his head,
he noticed a white rock whose surface had been polished to mirror smoothness and
realized that this must be one of the places which had been prepared for an
inscription.
‘Aha, gentlemen!’ said Jia Zheng turning back to address the others who were
climbing up behind him. ‘What name are we going to choose for this mountain?’
‘Emerald Heights,’ said one.
‘Embroidery Hill,’ said another.
Another proposed that they should call it ‘Little Censer’ after the famous Censer
Peak in Kiangsi. Another proposed ‘Little Zhong-nan’. Altogether some twenty or
thirty names were suggested -- none of them very seriously, since the literary
gentlemen were aware that Jia Zheng intended to test Bao-yu and were anxious not
to make the boy’s task too difficult. Bao-yu understood and was duly grateful.
When no more names were forthcoming Jia Zheng turned to Bao-yu and asked him
to propose something himself.
‘I remember reading in some old book,’ said Bao-yu, ‘that “to recall old things is
better than to invent new ones; and to re-cut an ancient text is better than to
engrave a modern”. We ought, then, to choose something old. But as this is not the
garden’s principal “mountain” or its chief vista, strictly speak?ing there is no
justification for having an inscription here at all—unless it is to be something which
implies that this is merely a first step towards more important things ahead. I suggest
we should call it “Pathway to Mysteries” after the line in Chang Jian’s poem about
the mountain temple:

A path winds upwards to mysterious places.

A name like that would be more distinguished.’
There was a chorus of praise from the literary gentlemen:
‘Exactly right! Wonderful! Our young friend with his natural talent and youthful
imagination succeeds immediately where we old pedants fail!’
Jia Zheng gave a deprecatory laugh:
‘You mustn’t flatter the boy! People of his age are adept at making a little
knowledge go a long way. I only asked him as a joke, to see what he would say. We
shall have to think of a better name later on.’
As he spoke, they passed through a tunnel of rock in the mountain’s shoulder into an
artificial ravine ablaze with the vari-coloured flowers and foliage of many varieties of
tree and shrub which grew there in great profusion. Down below, where the trees
were thickest, a clear stream gushed between the rocks. After they had advanced a
few paces in a somewhat northerly direction, the ravine broadened into a little
flat-bottomed valley and the stream widened out to form a pool. Gaily painted and
carved pavilions rose from the slopes on either side, their lower halves concealed
amidst the trees, their tops reaching into the blue. In the midst of the prospect below
them was a handsome bridge:
In a green ravine
A jade stream sped.
A stair of stone
Plunged to the brink.
where the water widened
To a placid pool,
A marble baluster
Ran round about.
A marble bridge crossed it
With triple span,
And a marble lion’s maw
Crowned each of the arches.
Over the centre of the bridge there was a little pavilion, which Jia Zheng and the
others entered and sat down in.
‘Well, gentlemen!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘What are we going to call it?’
‘Ou-yang Xiu in his Pavilion of the Old Drunkard speaks of “a pavilion poised above
the water”,’ said one of them. ‘what about “Poised Pavilion”?’
‘“Poised Pavilion” is good,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘but this pavilion was put here in order to
dominate the water it stands over, and I think there ought to be some reference to
water in its name. I seem to recollect that in that same essay you men?tion Ou-yang
Xiu speaks of the water “gushing between twin peaks”. Could we not use the word
“gushing” in some way?’
‘Yes, yes!’ said one of the literary gentlemen. ‘“Gushing Jade” would do splendidly.’
Jia Zheng fondled his beard meditatively, then turned to Bao-yu and asked him for his
suggestion.
‘I agreed with what you said just now, Father,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but on second thoughts
it seems to me that though it may have been all right for Ou-yang Xiu to use the word
“gush?ing” in describing the source of the river Rang, it doesn’t really suit the water
round this pavilion. Then again, as this is a Separate Residence specially designed for
the reception of a royal personage, it seems to me that something rather formal is
called for, and that an expression taken from the Drunkard’s Pavilion might seem a bit
improper. I think we should try to find a rather more imaginative, less obvious sort of
name.’
‘I hope you gentlemen are all taking this in!’ said Jia Zheng sarcastically, ‘You will
observe that when we suggest something original we are recommended to prefer the
old to the new, but that when we do make use of an old text we are “improper” and
“unimaginative”! -- Well, carry on then! Let’s have your suggestion!’
‘I think “Drenched Blossoms” would be more original and more tasteful than
“Gushing Jade”.’
Jia Zheng stroked his beard and nodded silently. The literary gentlemen could see
that he was pleased and hastened to commend Bao-yu’s remarkable ability.
‘That’s the two words for the framed board on top,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Not a very
difficult task. But what about the seven-word lines for the sides?’
Bao-yu glanced quickly round, seeking inspiration from the scene, and presently
came up with the following couplet:


‘Three pole-thrust lengths of bankside willows green,
One fragrant breath of bankside flowers sweet.’

Jia Zheng nodded and a barely perceptible smile played over his features. The literary
gentlemen redoubled their praises.
They now left the pavilion and crossed to the other side of the pool. For a while they
walked on, stopping from time to time to admire the various rocks and flowers and
trees which they passed on their way, until suddenly they found them?selves at the
foot of a range of whitewashed walls enclosing a small retreat almost hidden among
the hundreds and hundreds of green bamboos which grew in a dense thicket behind
them. With cries of admiration they went inside. A cloister-like covered walk ran
round the walls from the entrance to the back of the forecourt and a cobbled
pathway up to the steps of the terrace. The house was a tiny three-frame one, two
parts latticed, the third part windowless. The tables, chairs and couches which
furnished it seemed to have been specially made to fit the interior. A door in the rear
wall opened onto a garden of broad-leaved plantains dominated by a large flowering
pear-tree and overlooked on either side by two diminutive lodges built at right angles
to the back of the house. A stream gushed through an opening at the foot of the
garden wall into a channel barely a foot wide which ran to the foot of the rear terrace
and thence round the side of the house to the front, where it meandered through
the bamboos of the forecourt before finally disappearing through another opening in
the surrounding wall.
‘This must be a pleasant enough place at any time,’ said Jia Zheng with a smile. ‘But
just imagine what it would be like to sit studying beside the window here on a
moonlight night! It is pleasures like that which make a man feel he has not lived in
vain!’
As he spoke, his glance happened to fall on Bao-yu, who instantly became so
embarrassed that he hung his head in shame. He was rescued by the timely
intervention of the literary gentlemen who changed the subject from that of study to
a less dangerous topic. Two of them suggested that the name given to this retreat
should be a four-word one. Jia Zheng asked them what four words they proposed.
‘“Where Bends the Qi”’ said one of them, no doubt hav?ing in mind the song in the
Poetry Classic which begins with the words

See in that nook where bends the Qi,
The green bamboos, how graceful grown!
‘No,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Too obvious!’
‘“North of the Sui”,’ said the other, evidently thinking of the ancient Rabbit Garden
of the Prince of Liang in Suiyang—also famous for its bamboos and running water.
‘No,’ said jia Zheng. ‘Still too obvious!’
‘You’d better ask Cousin Bao again,’ said Cousin Zhen, who stood by listening.
‘He always insists on criticizing everyone else’s suggestions before he will deign to
make one of his own,’ said Jia Zheng.
‘He is a worthless creature.’
‘That’s all right,’ said the others. ‘His criticisms are very good ones. He is in no way
to blame for making them.’
‘You shouldn’t let him get away with it!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘All right!’ he went on,
turning to Bao-yu. ‘Today we will indulge you up to the hilt. Let’s have your criticisms,
and after that we’ll hear your own proposal. What about the two suggestions that
have just been made? Do you think either of them could be used?’
‘Neither of them seems quite right to me,’ said Bao-yu in answer to the question.
‘In what way “not quite right”?’ said Jia Zheng with a scornful smile.
‘Well,’ said Bao-yu, ‘This is the first building our visitor will enter when she looks
over the garden, so there ought to be some word of praise for the Emperor at this
point. If we want a classical reference with imperial symbolism, I suggest “The
Phoenix Dance”, alluding to that passage in the History Classic about the male and
female phoenixes alighting “with measured gambollings” in the Emperor’s courtyard.’
‘What about “Bend of the Qi” and “North of the Sui”?’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Aren’t they
classical allusions? If not, I should like to know what they are!’
‘Yes,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but they are too contrived. “The Phoenix Dance” is more fitting.’
There was a loud murmur of assent from the literary gentlemen. Jia Zhong nodded
and tried not to look pleased.
‘Young idiot!— A “small capacity but a great self-con?ceit”, gentlemen— All right!’
he ordered: ‘now the couplet!’
So Bao-yu recited the following couplet:

    ‘From the empty cauldron the steam still rises after the brewing of tea.
By the darkening window the fingers are still cold after the game of Go.’

Jia Zheng shook his head:
‘Nothing very remarkable about that!’
With this remark he began to move on, but thought of something just as they were
leaving, and stopped to ask Cousin Zhen:
‘I see that the buildings in this garden have their proper complement of chairs and
tables and so forth. What about blinds and curtains and flower-vases and all that sort
of thing? Have they been selected to suit the individual rooms?’
‘As regards ornaments,’ Cousin Zhen replied, ‘we have already got in quite a large
stock, and when the time comes we shall naturally select from it what is suitable for
each individual room. As regards drapes and hangings, Cousin Lian told me yesterday
that there are quite a lot yet to come. what we did was to take the measurements
from the plans drawn up for the carpenters and put the work in hand straight away,
even before the buildings were finished. As far as I know, up to yesterday we had
received about half of what was ordered.’
From the way Cousin Zhen spoke, Jia Zheng gathered that this was not his
responsibility and sent someone to summon Jia Lian. He arrived within moments,
and Jia Zheng ques?tioned him about the types and quantities ordered and the
figures for what had already been received and what was still to come.
In response to his inquiry Jia Lian extracted a wallet from the leg of his boot, and
glancing at a folded schedule inside it summarized its contents as follows:
‘Curtains, large and small, in various silks and satins—flowered, dragon-spot,
sprigged, tapestry, panelled, ink-splash: one hundred and twenty. —Eighty of those
were delivered yesterday. That leaves forty to come. —Blinds: two hundred. —Yes.
They all arrived yesterday. But then there are the special ones. —Blinds, scarlet felt:
two hundred. Speckled bamboo: one hundred. Red lacquered bamboo with gold
fleck: one hundred. Black lacquered bamboo: one hundred. Coloured net: two
hundred. —We now have half of each of those four kinds. The other half is promised
by the end of autumn. —Chair-covers, table-drapes, valances, tablecloths: one
thousand two hundred of each. —Those we already have.’
They had been moving on as he spoke, but were presently brought to a halt by a
steeply sloping hill which rose up in front of them. Having negotiated its foot, they
could see, almost concealed in a fold half-way up the other side of it, a dim-coloured
adobe wall crowned with a coping of rice-straw thatch. Inside it were several
hundred apricot trees, whose flowering tops resembled the billowing rosy clouds of
some vegetable volcano. In their midst stood a little group of reed?-thatched
cottages. Beyond the wall, with a barred gate divid?ing it in the middle, a loose
hedge of irregular shape had been made by weaving together the pliant young
shoots of the mulberry, elm, hibiscus, and silkworm thorn trees which grew outside it.
Between this hedge of trees and the lower slope of the hill was a rustic well,
furnished with both well-sweep and windlass. Below the well, row upon row of
miniature fields full of healthy-looking vegetables and flowers ran down in variegated
strips to the bottom.
‘Ah, now here is a place with a purpose!’ said Jia Zheng with a pleased smile. It may
have been made by human arti?fice, but the sight of it is none the less moving. In me
it awakens the desire to get back to the land, to a life of rural simplicity. Let us go in
and rest a while!’
They were just on the point of entering the gate in the hedge when they observed a
stone at the side of the pathway leading up to it which had evidently been put there
in order that the name of the place might be inscribed upon it.
‘What a brilliant idea!’ the literary gentlemen exclaimed. ‘If they had put a board
up over the gate, the rustic atmosphere would have been completely destroyed,
whereas this stone actually enhances it. This is a place which calls for the bucolic
talent of a Fan Cheng-da to do it justice!’
‘What shall we call it, then?’ asked Jia Zheng.
‘Just now our young friend was saying that to “recall an bid thing is better than to
invent a new one”,’ said one of the literary gentlemen. ‘In this case the ancients have
already provided the perfect name: “Apricot Village”.’
Jia Zheng knew that he was referring to the words of the fainting traveller in Du Mu’s
poem:


‘Where’s the tavern?’ I cry, and a lad points the way
To a village far off in the apricot trees.

He turned to Cousin Zhen with a smile:
‘Yes. That reminds me. There’s just one thing missing here: an inn-sign. Tomorrow
you must have one made. Nothing fancy. Just an ordinary inn-sign like the ones you
see in country villages outside. And it should hang from a bamboo pole above the
tree-tops.’
Cousin Zhen promised to see this done and added a sugges?tion of his own:
‘The birds here, too, ought to be ordinary farmyard ones—hens, ducks, geese, and
so on—to be in keeping with the surroundings.’
Jia Zheng and the rest agreed enthusiastically.
‘The only trouble with “Apricot Village”,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘—though it would suit the
place very well—is that it is the name of a real village; so we should have to get
official permission first before we could use it.’
‘Ah, yes,’ said the others. ‘That means we still have to think of something for a
temporary name. Now what shall it be?’
While they were all still thinking, Bao-yu who had already had an idea, was so
bursting with eagerness that he broke in, without waiting to be invited by his father:
‘There is an old poem which has the lines
Above the flowering apricot
A hopeful inn-sign hangs.

For the inscription on the stone we ought to have “The Hopeful Sign”.’
‘“The Hopeful Sign”,’ echoed the literary gentlemen admiringly. ‘Very good! The
hidden allusion to “Apricot Village” is most ingenious!’
‘Oh, as for the name of the village,’ said Bao-yu scornfully, ‘“Apricot Village” is
much too obvious! why not “Sweet-rice Village” from the words of the old poem:

A cottage by the water stands
Where Sweet the young rice smells?’

The literary gentlemen clapped their hands delightedly; but their cries of admiration
were cut short by an angry shout from Jia Zheng:
‘Ignorant young puppy! Just how many “old poets” and “old poems” do you think
you know, that you should pre?sume to show off in front of your elders in this
impertinent manner? We let you have your little say just now in order to test your
intelligence. It was no more than a joke. Do you suppose we are seriously interested
in your opinions?’
They had been moving on meanwhile, and he now led them into the largest of the
little thatched buildings, from whose simple interior with its paper windows and
plain deal furniture all hint of urban refinement had been banished. Jia Zheng was
inwardly pleased. He stared hard at Bao-yu:
‘How do you like this place, then?’
With secret winks and nods the literary gentlemen urged Bao-yu to make a
favourable reply, but he willfully ignored their promptings.
‘Not nearly as much as “The Phoenix Dance”.’
His father snorted disgustedly.
‘Ignoramus! You have eyes only for painted halls and gaudy pavilions—the rubbishy
trappings of wealth. What can you know of the beauty that lies in quietness and
natural simplicity? This is a consequence of your refusal to study properly.’
‘Your rebuke is, of course, justified, Father,’ Bao-yu replied promptly, ‘but then I
have never really understood what it was the ancients meant by “natural”.’
The literary gentlemen, who had observed a vein of mulish?ness in Bao-yu which
boded trouble, were surprised by the seeming na?veté of this reply.
‘Why, fancy not knowing what “natural” means -- you who have such a good
understanding of so much else! “Natural” is that which is of nature, that is to say,
that which is produced by nature as opposed to that which is produced by human
artifice.’
‘There you are, you see!’ said Bao-yu. ‘A farm set down in the middle of a place like
this is obviously the product of human artifice. There are no neighbouring villages, no
distant prospects of city walls; the mountain at the back doesn’t belong to any
system; there is no pagoda rising from some tree-hid monastery in the hills above;
there is no bridge below leading to a near-by market town. It sticks up out of
nowhere, in total isolation from everything else. It isn’t even a par?ticularly
remarkable view—not nearly so “natural” in either form or spirit as those other
places we have seen. The bam?boos in those other places may have been planted by
human hand and the streams diverted out of their natural courses, but there was no
appearance of artifice. That’s why, when the ancients use the term “natural” I have
my doubts about what they really meant. For example, when they speak of a “natural
painting”, I can’t help wondering if they are not referring to precisely that forcible
interference with the landscape to which I object: putting hills where they are not
meant to be, and that sort of thing. However great the skill with which this is done,
the results are never quite …”
His discourse was cut short by an outburst of rage from Jia Zheng.
‘Take that boy out of here!’
Bao-yu fled.
‘Come back!’
He returned.
‘You still have to make a couplet on this place. If it isn’t satisfactory, you will find
yourself reciting it to the tune of a slapped face!’
Bao-yu stood quivering with fright and for some moments was unable to say
anything. At last he recited the following couplet:


‘Emergent buds swell where the washerwoman soaks her cloth.
A fresh tang rises where the cress-gatherer fills his pannier.’

Jia Zheng shook his head:
‘Worse and worse.’
He led them out of the ‘village’ and round the foot of the hill:
through flowers and foliage,
by rock and rivulet,
past rose-crowned pergolas
and rose-twined trellises,
through small pavilions
embowered in peonies,
where scent of sweet-briers stole,
or pliant plantains waved –
until they came to a place where a musical murmur of water issued from a cave in
the rock. The cave was half-veiled by a green curtain of creeper, and the water below
was starred with bobbing blossoms.
‘What a delightful spot!’ the literary gentlemen exclaimed. ‘Very well, gentlemen.
What are you going to call it?’ said Jia Zheng.
Inevitably the literary gentlemen thought of Tao Yuan-?ming’s fisherman of Wu-ling
and his Peach-blossom Stream.
‘“The Wu-ling Stream”,’ said one of them. ‘The name is ready-made for this place.
No need to look further than that.’
Jia Zheng laughed:
‘The same trouble again, I am afraid. It is the name of a real place. In any case, it is
too hackneyed.’
‘All right,’ said the others good-humouredly. ‘In that case simply call it “Refuge of
the Qins”.’ Their minds still ran on the Peach-blossom Stream and its hidden paradise.
‘That’s even more inappropriate!’ said Bao-yu. ‘“Refuge of the Qins” would imply
that the people here were fugitives from tyranny. How can we possibly call it that? I
suggest “Smartweed Bank and Flowery Harbour”.’
‘Rubbish!’ said Jia Zheng. He looked inside the grotto and asked Cousin Zhen if
there were any boats.
‘Four punts for lotus-gathering and one for pleasure are on order,’ said Cousin Zhen,
‘but they haven’t finished making them yet.’
‘What a pity we cannot go through!’ said Jia Zheng.
‘There is a very steep path over the top which would take us there,’ said Cousin
Zhen, and proceeded to lead the way.
The others scrambled up after him, clinging to creepers and leaning on tree-trunks as
they went. When, having descended more, they had regained the stream it was wide
and deep once and distorted by many anfractuosities. The fallen blossoms seemed to
be even more numerous and the waters on whose surface they floated even more
limpid than they had been on the side they had just come from. The weeping willows
which lined both banks were here and there diversified with peach and apricot trees
whose interlacing branches made little worlds of stillness and serenity beneath them.
Suddenly, through the green of the willows, they glimpsed the scarlet balustrade of a
wooden bridge whose sloping ramps led to a flat central span high above the water.
When they had crossed it, they found a choice of paths leading to different parts of
the garden. Ahead was an airy building with roofs of tile, whose elegant surrounding
wall was of grey-plastered brick pierced by ornamental grilles made of semi-circular
tiles laid together in openwork patterns. The wall was so constructed that outcrops
of rock from the garden’s ‘master mountain’ appeared to run through it in several
places into the courtyard inside.
‘This building seems rather out of place here,’ said Jia Zheng.
But as he entered the gate the source of his annoyance dis?appeared; for a miniature
mountain of rock, whose many holes and fissures, worn through it by weathering or
the wash of waters, bestowed on it a misleading appearance of fragile delicacy,
towered up in front of him and combined with the many smaller rocks of various
shapes and sizes which sur?rounded it to efface from their view every vestige of the
build?ing they had just been looking at.
Not a single tree grew in this enclosure, only plants and herbs:
some aspired as vines,
some crept humbly on the ground;
some grew down from the tops of rocks,
some upwards from their feet;
some hung from the eaves in waving trails of green,
some clung to pillars in circling bands of gold;
some had blood-red berries,
some had golden flowers.
And from every flower and every plant and every herb wafted the most exquisite and
incomparable fragrances.
Jia Zheng could not help but admire:
‘Charming! But what are they all?’
‘Wild-fig’ and ‘wistaria’ was all the literary gentlemen would venture.
‘But surely,’ Jia Zheng objected, ‘wild-fig and wisteria do not have this delectable
fragrance?’
‘They certainly don’t,’ said Bao-yu. ‘There are wild-fig and wisteria among the
plants growing here, but the ones with the fragrance are pollia and birthwort and --
yes, I think those are orchids of some kind. That one over there is probably actinidia.
The red flowers are, of course, rue, the “herb of grace”, and the green ones must be
green-flag. A lot of these rare plants are mentioned in Li sao and Wen xuan,
particularly in the Poetical Descriptions of the Three Capitals by Zuo Si. For example,
in his Description of the Wu Capital he has

agastache, eulalia,
and harsh-smelling ginger-bush,
cord-flower, cable-flower,
centaury and purplestrife,
stone-sail and water-pine
and sweet-scented eglantine...

And then there are

amaranth, xanthoxylon,
anemone, phellopteron...

They come in the Description of the Shu Capital. Of course, after all these centuries
nobody really knows what all those names stand for. They apply them quite
arbitrarily to whatever seem to fit the description, and gradually all of them—’
Once more an angry shout from his father cut him short:
‘Who asked for your opinion?’
Bao-yu shrank back and said no more.
Observing that there were balustraded loggias on either side of the court, Jia Zheng
led his party through one of them towards the building at the rear. It was a cool,
five-frame gallery with a low, roofed verandah running round it on all sides. The
window-lattices were green and tile walls freshly painted. It was a building of quite
another order of elegance from the ones they had so far visited.
‘Anyone who sat sipping tea and playing the qin to himself on this verandah would
have no need to burn incense if he wanted sweet smells for his inspiration,’ said Jia
Zheng dreamily. ‘So unexpectedly beautiful a place calls for a specially beautiful
name to adorn it.’
‘What could be better than “Dewy Orchids”?’ said the literary gentleman.
‘Yes,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘That would do for the name. Now what about the couplet?’
‘I have thought of a couplet,’ said one of the gentlemen. ‘Tell me all of you what
you think of it:

A musky perfume of orchids hangs in the sunset courtyard.
A sweet aroma of galingale floats over the moonlit island.’


‘Not bad,’ said the others. ‘But why “sunset courtyard”?’
‘I was thinking of that line in the old poem,’ said the man:

‘The garden’s gillyflowers at sunset weep.

After all, you have already got “dewy” in the name. I thought the “sunset weeping”
would go with it rather well.’
‘Feeble! Feeble!’ cried the rest.
‘I’ve thought of a couplet, too,’ said one of the others. ‘Let me have your opinion of
it:

Down garden walks a fragrant breeze caresses beds of melilot.
By courtyard walls a brilliant moon illumines golden orchises.’

Jia Zheng stroked his beard, and his lips were observed to move as though he was on
the point of proposing a couplet of his own. Suddenly, looking up, he caught sight of
Bao-yu skulking behind the others, too scared to speak.
‘What’s the matter with you?’ he bellowed at the unfortu?nate boy. ‘You are ready
enough with your opinions when they are not wanted. Speak up! —Or are you
waiting for a written invitation?’
‘I can see no “musk” or “moonlight” or “islands” in this place,’ said Bao-yu, ‘If we
are to make couplets in this follow-my-leader fashion, we could turn out a couple of
hundred of them and still have more to come.’
‘No one’s twisting your arm,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘You don’t have to use those words if
you don’t want to.’
‘In that case,’ said Bao-yu, ‘I suggest “The Garden of Spices” for the name; and for
the couplet:

Composing amidst cardamoms, you shall make verses like flowers.
Slumbering amidst the roses, you shall dream fragrant dreams.’


‘We all know where you got that from,’ said Jia zheng:

‘Composing midst the plantains
Green shall my verses be.

We can’t give you much credit for an imitation.’
‘Not at all!’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘There is nothing wrong with imitation
provided it is done well. After all, Li Bo’s poem “On Phoenix Terrace” is entirely based
on Cui Hao’s “Yellow Crane Tower”, yet it is a much better poem. On reflection our
young friend’s couplet seems more poetical and imaginative than the original.’
‘Oh, come now!’ said Jia Zheng. But they could see he was not displeased.
Leaving the place of many fragrances behind them, they had not advanced much
further when they could see ahead of them a building of great magnificence which
Jia Zheng at once identified as the main reception hall of the Residence.
Roof above roof soared,
Eye up-compelling,
Of richly-wrought chambers
And high winding galleries.
Green rafts of dark pine
Brushed the eaves’ edges.
Milky magnolias
Bordered the buildings.
Gold-glinting cat-faces,
Rainbow-hued serpents’ snouts
Peered out or snarled down
From cornice and finial.
‘It is rather a showy building,’ said Jia Zheng. But the literary gentlemen reassured
him:
‘Although Her Grace is a person of simple and abstemious tastes, the exalted
position she now occupies makes it only right and proper that there should be a
certain amount of pomp in her reception. This building is in no way excessive.’
Still advancing in the same direction, they presently found themselves at the foot of
the white marble memorial arch which framed the approach to the hall. The pattern
of writhing dragons protectively crouched over its uppermost horizontal was so
pierced and fretted by the sculptor’s artistry as to resemble lacework rather than
solid stone.
‘What inscription do we want on this arch?’ Jia Zheng inquired.
‘“Peng-lai’s Fairy Precincts” is the only name that would do it justice,’ said the
literary gentlemen.
Jia Zheng shook his head and said nothing.
The sight of this building and its arch had inspired a strange and unaccountable stir of
emotion in Bao-yu which on reflec?tion he interpreted as a sign that he must have
known a build?ing somewhat like this before -- though where or when he could not
for the life of him remember. He was still racking his brains to recall what it reminded
him of; when Jia Zheng ordered him to produce a name and couplet for the arch, and
he was quite unable to give his mind to the task of composi?tion. The literary
gentlemen, not knowing the nature of his preoccupation, supposed that his father’s
incessant bullying had worn him out and that he had finally come to the end of his
inspiration. They feared that further bullying might once more bring out the mulish
streak in him, thereby provoking an explosion which would be distasteful for
everybody. Accordingly they urged Jia Zheng to allow him a day’s grace in which to
produce something suitable. Jia Zheng, who was secretly beginning to be
apprehensive about the possible consequences of Grandmother Jia’s anxiety for her
darling grand?son, yielded, albeit with a bad grace:
‘Jackanapes! So even you have your off moments it seems. Well, I’ll give you a day
to do it in. But woe betide you if you can’t produce something tomorrow! And it had
better be something good, too, because this is the most important building in the
garden.’
After they had seen over the building and come out again, they stopped for a while
on the terrace to look at a general view of the whole garden and attempted to make
out the places they had already visited. They were surprised to find that even now
they had covered little more than half of the whole area. Just at that moment a
servant came up to report that someone had arrived with a message from Yu-cun.
‘I can see that we shan’t be able to finish today,’ said Jia Zheng. However, if we go
out by the way I said, we should at least be able to get some idea of the general
layout.’
He conducted them to a large bridge above a crystal curtain of rushing water. It was
the weir through which the water from the little river which fed all the pools and
watercourses of the garden ran into it from outside. Jia Zheng invited them to name
it.


‘This is the source of the “Drenched Blossoms” stream we looked at earlier on,’ said
Bao-yu. ‘We should call it “Drenched Blossoms Weir”.’
‘Rubbish!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘You may as well forget about your “Drenched Blossoms”,
because we are not going to use that name!’
Their progress continued past many unexplored features of the garden, viz:
a summer lodge
a straw-thatched cot
a dry-stone wall
a flowering arch
a tiny temple nestling beneath a hill
a nun’s retreat hidden in a little wood
a straight gallery
a crooked cave
a square pavilion
and a round belvedere.
But Jia Zheng hurried past every one of them without enter?ing. However, he had
now been walking for a very long time without a rest and was beginning to feel
somewhat footsore; and so, when the next building appeared through the trees
ahead, he proposed that they should go in and sit down, and led his party towards it
by the quickest route possible. They had to walk round a stand of double-flowering
ornamental peach-trees and through a circular opening in a flower-covered bamboo
trellis. This brought them in sight of the building’s whitewashed enclosing wall and
the contrasting green of the weeping willows which surrounded it. A roofed gallery
ran from each side of the gate round the inner wall of the fore?court, in which a few
rocks were scattered. On one side of it some green plantains were growing and on
the other a weeping variety of Szechwan crab, whose pendant clusters of
double-flowering carmine blossoms hung by stems as delicate as golden wires on the
umbrella-shaped canopy of its boughs.
‘What magnificent blossom!’ exclaimed the literary gentle?men. ‘One has seen
plenty of crab-apple blossom before, but never anything as beautiful as this.’
‘This kind is called “maiden crab”,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘It comes from abroad. According
to vulgar belief it originally came from the Land of Maidens, and that is supposed to
be the reason why it blooms so profusely. Needless to say, it is only the ignorant sort
of persons who hold this ridiculous belief.’
‘It certainly has most unusual blossoms,’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘Who knows,
perhaps there is something in the popular belief.’
‘Surely,’ said Bao-yu, ‘it is much more probable that poets and painters gave it the
name of “maiden crab” because of its rouge-like colour and delicate, drooping shape,
and that the name was misunderstood by ignorant, literal-minded people, who made
up this silly story to account for it.’
‘That must be it!’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘Most grate?ful for the explanation!’
While they were speaking they were at the same time arranging themselves on some
benches in the gallery.
‘Has anyone an original idea for a name?’ said Jia Zheng when they were all seated.
One of them proposed ‘Storks in the Plantains’. Another suggested ‘Shimmering
Splendour’.
“‘Shimmering Splendour”,’ Jia Zheng and the others repeated, trying out the words.
‘That’s good!’
‘A lovely name!’ said Bao-yu. But a moment later he added: ‘Rather a pity, though.’
‘Why “rather a pity”?’ they asked.
‘Well,’ said Bao-yu, ‘there are both plantains and crab-apple blossom in this
courtyard. Whoever planted them must have been thinking of “the red and the
green”. If our name men?tions only one and leaves out the other, it will seem
somehow inadequate.’
‘What do you suggest, then?’ said Jia Zheng.
       ‘I suggest “Fragrant Red and Lucent Green”,’ said Bao-yu. ‘That takes account
of both of them.’
Jia zheng shook his head:
‘No, that’s no good!’
He led them inside the building. Its interior turned out to be all corridors and alcoves
and galleries, so that properly speaking it could hardly have been said to have rooms
at all. The partition walls which made these divisions were of wooden panelling
exquisitely carved in a wide variety of motifs: bats in clouds, the ‘three friends of
winter’—pine, plum and bamboo, little figures in landscapes, birds and flowers,
scrollwork, antique bronze shapes, ‘good luck’ and ‘long life’ characters, and many
others. The carvings, all of them the work of master craftsmen, were beautified with
inlays of gold, mother-o’-pearl and semi-precious stones. In addition to being
panelled, the partitions were pierced by numerous apertures, some round, some
square, some sun-flower-shaped, some shaped like a fleur-de-lis, some cusped, some
fan-shaped. Shelving was concealed in the double thick?ness of the partition at the
base of these apertures, making it possible to use them for storing books and writing
materials and for the display of antique bronzes, vases of flowers, miniature
tray-gardens and the like. The overall effect was at once richly colourful and, because
of the many apertures, airy and graceful.
The trompe-l’ail effect of these ingenious partitions had been further enhanced by
inserting false windows and doors in them, the former covered in various pastel
shades of gauze, the latter hung with richly-patterned damask portieres. The main
walls were pierced with window-like perforations in the shape of zithers, swords,
vases and other objects of virtù.
The literary gentlemen were rapturous:
‘Exquisite!’ they cried. ‘what marvellous workmanship!’
Jia Zheng, after taking no more than a couple of turns inside this confusing interior,
was already lost. To the left of him was what appeared to be a door. To the right was
a wall with a window in it. But on raising its portiere he discovered the door to be a
bookcase; and when, looking back, he observed— what he had not noticed before—
that the light coming in through the silk gauze of the window illuminated a
passage-way lead?ing to an open doorway, and began walking towards it, a party of
gentlemen similar to his own came advancing to meet him, and he realized that he
was walking towards a large mirror. They were able to circumvent the mirror, but
only to find an even more bewildering choice of doorways on the other side.
‘Come!’ said Cousin Zhen with a laugh. ‘Let me show you the way! If we go out
here we shall be in the back courtyard. We can reach the gate of the garden much
more easily from the back courtyard than from the front.’
He led them round the gauze hangings of a summer-bed, then through a door into a
garden full of rambler roses. Behind the rose-trellis was a stream running between
green banks. The literary gentlemen were intrigued to know where the water came
from. Cousin Zhen pointed in the direction of the weir they had visited earlier:
‘The water comes in over that weir, then through the grotto, then under the lea of
the north-east “mountain” to the little farm. There a channel is led off it which runs
into the south-east corner of the garden. Then it runs round and rejoins the main
stream here. And from here the water flows out again underneath that wall.’
‘How very ingenious!’
They moved on again, but soon found themselves at the foot of a tall ‘mountain’.
‘Follow me!’ said Cousin Zhen, amused at the bewilder?ment of the others, who
were now completely at sea as to their whereabouts. He led them round the foot of
the ‘mountain’—and there, miraculously, was a broad, flat path and the gate by
which they had entered, rising majestically in front of them.
‘Well!’ exclaimed the literary gentlemen. ‘This beats everything! The skill with
which this has all been designed is quite out of this world!’
Whereupon they all went out of the garden.

*

Bao-yu was now longing to get back to the girls, but as no dis?missal was
forthcoming from his father, he followed him along with the others into his study.
Fortunately Jia Zheng suddenly recollected that Bao-yu was still with him:
‘Well, run along then! Your grandmother will be worrying about you. I take it you’re
not still waiting for more?’
At last Bao-yu could withdraw. But as soon as he was in the courtyard outside, he was
waylaid by a group of Jia Zheng’s pages who laid hands on him and prevented him
from going.
‘You’ve done well today, haven’t you, coming out top with all those poems? You
have us to thank for that! Her Old Ladyship sent round several times asking about
you, but because the Master was so pleased with you, we told her not to worry. If we
hadn’t done that, you wouldn’t have had the chance to show off your poems!
Everyone says they were better than all the others. What about sharing your good
luck with us?’
Bao-yu laughed good-naturedly.
‘All right. A string of cash each.’
‘Who wants a measly string of cash? Give us that little purse you’re wearing!’ And
without a ‘by your leave’ they began to despoil him, beginning with the purse and his
fan-case, of all his trinkets, until every one of the objects he carried about him had
been taken from him.
‘Now,’ they said, ‘we’ll see you back in style!’
And closing round him, they marched him back to Grandmother Jia’s apartment in
triumphal procession.
Grandmother Jia had been waiting for him with some anxiety, and was naturally
delighted to see him come in apparently none the worse for his experience.
Soon after, when he was back in his own room, Aroma came in to pour him some tea
and noticed that all the little objects he usually carried about his waist had
disappeared.
‘Where have the things from your belt gone?’ she said. ‘I suppose those worthless
pages have taken them again.’
Dai-yu overheard her and came up to inspect. Sure enough, not one of the things
was there.
‘So you’ve given away that little purse I gave you? Very well, then. You needn’t
expect me to give you anything in future, however much you want it!’
With these words she went off to her own room in a temper, and taking up a still
unfinished perfume sachet which she was making for him at his own request, she
began to cut it up with her embroidery scissors. Bao-yu, observing that she was angry,
had hurried after her—but it was too late. The sachet was already cut to pieces.
Although it had not been finished, Bao-yu could see that the embroidery was very
fine, and it made him angry to think of the hours and hours of work so wantonly
destroyed. Tearing open his collar he took out the little embroidered purse which had
all along been hanging round his neck and held it out for her to see.
‘Look! What’s that? When have I ever given anything of yours to someone else?’
Dai-yu knew that he must have treasured her gift to have worn it inside his clothing
where there was no risk of its being taken from him. She regretted her over-hasty
destruction of the sachet and hung her head in silence.
‘You needn’t have cut it up,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I know it’s only because you hate giving
things away. Here, you can have this back too since you’re so stingy!’
He tossed the purse into her lap and turned to go. Dai-yu burst into tears of rage, and
picking up the little purse, attacked that too with her scissors. Bao-yu hurried back
and caught her by the wrist.
‘Come, cuzzy dear!’ he said with a laugh. ‘Have mercy on it!’
Dai-yu threw down the scissors and wiped her streaming eyes.
‘You shouldn’t blow hot and cold by turns. If you want to quarrel, let’s quarrel
properly and have nothing to do with each other!’
She got up on the kang in a great huff, and turning her back on him, sobbed into her
handkerchief and affected to ignore his presence. But Bao-yu got up beside her, and
with many soothing words and affectionate endearments humbly en?treated her
forgiveness.
Meanwhile in the front room Grandmother Jia was calling loudly for her beloved
grandson.
‘Master Bao is in the back with Miss Lin,’ they told her.
‘Ah, good!’ said the old lady. ‘Let us leave them alone together, then. it will be a
nice relaxation for him after the strain of being so long with his father -- as long as
they don’t argue.’
‘Yes, milady.’
Finding herself unable to shake off Bao-yu’s attentions, Dai-yu got up from the kang:
‘I can see you are determined not to let me live in peace. I shall just have to go
elsewhere.’ And off she went.
‘Wherever you go, I shall go with you,’ said Bao-yu, taking up the purse and
beginning to fasten it on again. But Dai-yu snatched it away from him.
‘First you say you don’t want it, and now you are trying to put it on again. You
ought to be ashamed of yourself!’
Her anger dissolved in a little explosion of laughter.
‘Dearest cuzzy!’ said Bao-yu. ‘Won’t you please make me another sachet?’
‘That depends on whether I feel in the mood or not,’ said Dai-yu.
Chatting together they went out of the room and round to Lady Wang’s apartment.
Bao-chai was there already. They found everyone there in a state of great excitement
owing to the fact that Jia Qiang had lust arrived back from Soochow with the twelve
child-actresses he had purchased there, to?gether with their instructors and all the
costumes and proper?ties they would use in performing their plays.
Aunt Xue had now moved to a quiet, secluded apartment m the north-east corner of
the mansion, and Pear-tree Court was undergoing alterations for use as a drama
school where the instructors could train and rehearse their little charges. A number
of female members of the Rong-guo staff who had some previous training in singing
and acting—they were all grey-haired old women by now—were put in charge of the
domestic arrangements. Pay and expenses and the provision of whatever was
needed for the maintenance of the troupe was to remain in the hands of Jia Qiang,
who was also to keep the accounts.
Simultaneously with this arrival, Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife had come to announce that the
selection and purchase of twenty-four little nuns—twelve Buddhist and twelve
Taoist—had been successfully accomplished. Even the twenty-four little habits they
would wear had now arrived brand-new from the tailor. But that was not all. It
appeared that a young lady who had entered the church under half vows as an
‘unshaved nun’ might be persuaded to loin them.
‘She comes of a highly educated official family from Soo?chow,’ Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife
told them. ‘As a child she was always ailing and her parents paid for any number of
“proxy novices” in the hope that she would get better; but all was of no avail. In the
end there was nothing for it but for the young lady to take the great step herself --
though as a lay sister, without the shaving of hair. And sure enough her illness got
better immediately. She is now eighteen years of age. Her name in religion is
“Adamantina”. She lost both her parents some time ago and has only two old nurses
and a little maid to look after her. She’s said to be a great clerk and knows all the
classics by heart. What’s more, she is a very handsome young woman. She moved
into this area with her teacher a year ago because of some relic of Guanyin she had
heard about and because there are some old Sanskrit texts here that she wanted to
look at. She has been living ever since in the Sakyamuni Convent outside the west
gate. Her teacher was a great authority on the “Primordial” branch of the Tantra. She
died last winter. As she lay dying she told Adamantina that she was not to go back
home, but to wait here quietly for a call. That is why she stays on here and has never
taken her teacher’s coffin back.’
‘We should certainly take advantage of this to invite her here,’ said Lady Wang.
‘We have tried asking her,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, ‘but the reply she gives is that
noble households are given to trampling on other people’s feelings, and she is not
disposed to be trampled on.’
‘She is bound to be rather a ‘proud young woman, coming from a family of
officials,’ said Lady Wang. ‘I don’t see why we shouldn’t make out a written invitation
and request her formally.’
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife promised to see this done and hurried off to ask one of the
professional letter-writers in the family’s employment to make out a formal invitation.
Next day a carriage was sent round to fetch Adamantina to the mansion in a style
befitting a young gentlewoman of tender suscepti?bilities.
But as to what happened thereafter: that will be disclosed in the ensuing chapter.
CHAPTER 18



A brief family reunion is permitted by the
magnanimity of a gracious Emperor
And an Imperial Concubine takes pleasure in the
literary progress of a younger brother



Just at that moment a servant came in to say that the workmen needed some gauze
for pasting on window-lattices and asked Xi-feng if she would unlock the storeroom
for them. Then another servant arrived and asked her to take charge of some gold
and silver plate. Lady Wang and her maids also seemed to be fully occupied.
Thoughtful Bao-chai pointed out to Bao-yu and the rest that they were getting in
everyone’s way, and at her suggestion they all adjourned to Ying-chun’s room.
Lady Wang’s business in fact continued unabated until well into the tenth month. By
then the contractors had fulfilled their contracts and the various buildings in the
garden been stocked with appropriate ornaments and antiques; supplies of
livestock—storks, deer, rabbits, chicken, geese, and so forth--had been purchased
and distributed to the parts of the garden where they were to be reared; Jia Qiang’s
young ladies had rehearsed and were word-perfect in twenty or thirty operatic pieces;
and the little Buddhist and Taoist nuns had mastered the essential parts of their
respective liturgies. Jia Zheng could now feel reasonably well satisfied that things
were as they should be, and invited Grandmother Jia into the garden for a final
inspection in which she was to suggest any last-minute alterations that might still be
needed. When not the slightest shadow of an imperfection could any more be found,
he at last sent in his written application for a Visitation. The Gracious Reply arrived
on the very same day:

Her Grace will make a Family Visitation next year on the fif?teenth of the first month,
being the Festival of Lanterns.

The receipt of this reply seemed to throw the Jia family into an even greater frenzy of
preparation than before, so that even its New Year celebrations that year were
somewhat scamped.
In no time at all the Festival of Lanterns seemed to be almost upon them. On the
eighth of the first month a eunuch came from the Palace to inspect the layout of the
Separate Residence and to establish where the Imperial Concubine would ‘change
her clothes’, where she would sit to converse with her family, where she would
receive their obeisances, where she would feast them, and where she would retire to
when she wanted to rest. The eunuch Chief of Security also arrived with his eunuch
minions and supervised a great deal of sealing-up and screening-off everywhere. He
also instructed the members of the household in the regulations for leaving and
entering, serving food and bringing messages, all of which had to be done through
special entrances and exits and by special routes.
Outside the mansion the Chief Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police and a
gentleman from the Board of Works were busy supervising the sweeping of the
surrounding streets and the chasing away of all idlers, onlookers and other
suspicious-looking characters.
Meanwhile Jia She and the consortium were putting up ornamental lanterns
everywhere in the gardens and fixing fireworks in place for a pyrotechnic display in
honour of the visit. By the fourteenth everything was finally ready. No one in the Jia
household, whether master or servant, had a wink of sleep throughout the whole of
that night.
By five o’clock next morning, when it was still dark night outside, all those in the
family from Grandmother Jia down?wards who held any sort of rank or title were
already dressed in full court rig. In the Separate Residence
    painted phoenix and coiling dragon
         flapped and fluttered on drapes and curtains,
         gold and silver-work gleamed and glinted,
         jewels and gems made a fiery sparkle,
         subtle incenses smouldered in brazen censers,
        ‘everlastings’ blossomed in china vases;
—and all was so silent, that throughout the whole of that great garden not the sound
of a cough was to be heard.
Jia She and the other menfolk drew themselves up outside the west gate.
Grandmother Jia stood outside the main gate with the female members of the family.
They noticed that the ends of the street and the entrances of the side-streets leading
into it had all been screened off.
Just as they were beginning to grow impatient, a eunuch trotted up on horseback
and was stopped and questioned by Jia Zheng
‘Oh, you’re much too early yet!’ said the eunuch. ‘Her Grace won’t be taking her
lunch until one o’clock; then at two she goes to divine service in the Bao-ling chapel.
Five o’clock, when she has an appointment to feast with the Emperor in the Da-ming
Palace and look at the New Year lanterns, is the first opportunity she will have of
asking permission to leave. I should be surprised if she got started much before seven
o’clock this evening!’
‘Well,’ said Xi-feng to Grandmother Jia when she heard this, ‘you and Aunt Wang
may as well go back to your room. You will be able to come back later on nearer the
time.’
Grandmother Jia and the other ladies took her advice and went off, leaving Xi-feng to
attend to whatever still needed doing in the garden. Under her direction some of the
stewards carried off the eunuchs and treated them to food and wine, while other
servants fetched great bundles of wax candles to illuminate the garden’s many
lanterns with.
Suddenly, as afternoon drew towards evening, a clatter of many hooves was heard,
and after a short pause, a group of ten or so eunuchs rushed in out of breath,
clapping their hands as they ran. This was taken by the other eunuchs as a sign that
the Imperial Concubine was on her way, for they at once jumped up and hurried to
their prearranged places. The family, too, took up their positions once more, Jia She
and the menfolk outside the west gate and Grandmother Jia with the ladies outside
the main entrance.
For a long time there was total silence. Then a couple of eunuchs on horseback came
riding very, very slowly up to the west gate. Dismounting, they led their horses out of
sight behind the cloth screens, then returned to take up their stand at the sides of
the road, half-facing towards the west. After a considerable wait, two more eunuchs
arrived and went through the same motions as the first pair. Then another two, and
then another, until in all some ten pairs were standing at the sides of the road, their
faces turned expectantly towards the west.
Presently a faint sound of music was heard and the Imperial Concubine’s procession
at last came in sight.
First came several pairs of eunuchs carrying embroidered banners.
Then several more pairs with ceremonial pheasant-feather fans.
Then eunuchs swinging gold-inlaid censers in which special ‘palace incense’ was
burning.
Next came a great gold-coloured ‘seven-phoenix’ umbrella of state, hanging from its
curve-topped shaft like a great drooping bell-flower. In its shadow was borne the
Imperial Concubine’s travelling wardrobe: her head-dress, robe, sash and shoes.
Eunuch gentlemen-in-waiting followed carrying her rosary, her embroidered
handkerchief, her spittoon, her fly-whisk, and various other items.
Last of all, when this army of attendants had gone by, a great gold-topped palanquin
with phoenixes embroidered on its yellow curtains slowly advanced on the shoulders
of eight eunuch bearers.
As Grandmother Jia and the rest dropped to their knees eunuchs rushed up and
helped them to get up again. The palanquin passed through the great gate and made
for the entrance of a courtyard on the east side of the forecourt. There a eunuch
knelt beside it and invited the Imperial Concubine to descend and ‘change her
clothes’. The bearers carried it through the entrance and set it down just inside the
courtyard. The other eunuchs then withdrew, leaving Yuan-chun’s ladies-in-waiting to
help her from the palanquin.
The courtyard she now stepped out into was brilliant with coloured lanterns of silk
gauze cunningly fashioned in all sorts of curious and beautiful shapes and patterns.
An illuminated sign hung over the entrance of the principal building:

PILLED WITH FAVOURS BATHED IN BLESSINGS

Yuan-chun passed beneath it into the room that had been prepared for her, then,
having ‘changed her clothes’, came out again and stepped back into the palanquin,
which was now borne into the garden.
Her first impression was a confused one of curling drifts of incense smoke and
gleaming colours. There were lanterns everywhere, and soft strains of music. She
seemed to be enter?ing a little world wholly dedicated to the pursuit of ease and
luxury and delight. Looking at it from the depths of her palanquin she shook her head
a little sadly and sighed:
‘Oh dear, this is all so extravagant!’
At that moment a eunuch knelt beside the palanquin and invited the Imperial
Concubine to proceed by boat. Stepping out onto the waiting barge she saw an
expanse of clear water curving between its banks like a sportive dragon. Lanterns of
crystal and glass were fixed to the balustrades which lined the banks, their silvery
radiance giving the white marble, in the semi-darkness, the appearance of gleaming
drifts of snow. Because of the season, the willows and apricot trees above them were
bare and leafless; but in place of leaves they were festooned with hundreds of tiny
lanterns, and flowers of gauze, rice-paper and bast had been fastened to the tips of
their branches. Other lanterns made of shells and feathers, in the form of lotuses,
water-lilies, ducks and egrets floated on the surface of the water below. It would
have been hard to say whether the water below or the banks above presented the
more brilliant spectacle. Together they combined to make a fairyland of jewelled light.
And to these visual delights were added the many charming miniature gardens on
the barge itself—not to mention its pearl blinds, embroidered curtains, and the
carved and painted oars and paddle with which it was furnished. While Yuan-chun
was still admiring all this, her boat approached a landing-stage in a grotto, above
which hung a lantern-sign inscribed with these words:

SMARTWEED BANK AND FLOWERY HARBOUR

Stone’s Note to Reader:
You may find it surprising that ‘Smartweed Bank and Flowery Harbour’, ‘The Phoenix
Dance’ and those other names, which in the last chapter we showed Bao-yu
inventing in an aptitude test imposed at random by his father, should actually have
been used on the occasion of the Imperial Concubine’s first visit to her family. Surely,
you will say, a household as long established and highly cultivated as the Jias’ must
have had several well-known talents at its disposal which it could have called upon
for such important purposes as these? These were no wealthy parvenus whose
vulgarity would be satisfied with the effusions of a gifted schoolboy for filling in the
gaps where inscription are felt to be de rigueur.
The answer lies in Yuan-chun’s special relationship with Bao-yu. Before Yuan-chun
entered the Palace, she had been brought up mainly by Grandmother Jia; and when
Bao-yu appeared on the scene (at a time when his mother was already middle-aged
and unlikely to have any more children) she had lavished all her affection on this little
brother who spent all his time with her at their grandmother’s. When he was still a
very little boy of only three or four and had not yet begun his schooling, she had
taught him to recite several texts and to recognize several thousand characters.
Although they were brother and sister, their relationship was more like that of a
mother and her son; and even after she entered the Palace, she was always writing
letters to her father and her male cousins in which she expressed concern for the
little boy who was so constantly in her thoughts. ‘I beg you to be most careful in your
handling of this child,’ she once wrote. ‘If you are not strict with him, he will never
grow up into a proper man. But if you are too strict, you may endanger his health and
cause Grandmother to be distressed.’
When, some months previously, Jia Zheng received a favourable report from Bao-yu’s
schoolmaster in which his creative ability was commended, he had used the visit to
the garden as a means of trying him out. The results were not, of course, what a
great writer would have produced in similar circumstances, but at least they were not
unworthy of the family’s literary traditions, and Jia Zheng resolved that his daughter
should see them, so that she might know that the progress made by her beloved
younger brother fully came up to the measure of those ardent hopes she had so
often expressed in her letters.
—Incidentally, Bao-yu had, in the intervening time, supplied many more inscriptions
for the places they had been unable to cover on that first occasion.
Stone

When Yuan-chun saw the words ‘Smartweed Bank and Flowery Harbour’ she
laughed.
‘Surely “Flowery Harbour” is enough by itself? Why “Smartweed Bank” as well?’
At once an attendant eunuch disembarked and rushed like the wind to tell Jia Zheng,
who
immediately gave orders to have the inscription changed.
By this time the barge had drawn alongside the bank and Yuan-chun disembarked
and
stepped once more into her palanquin. Soon she was borne into that part of the
garden where
‘Roof above roof soared
Eye up-compelling ...’
and saw the white marble memorial arch which had so strongly affected Bao-yu
when he first saw it. It now bore a temporary inscription:

PRECINCT OF THE CELESTIAL VISITANT

Yuan-chun gave orders that the words ‘The House of Reunion’ should be substituted.
She now ascended the terraces and entered the open-fronted hall of audience.
From a ring of cressets against the night sky
a fragrant scatter dropped on the flagstones;
and candelabra like fiery fir-trees
gleamed festively in the gilded casements;
         there were blinds looped and fringed like a prawn’s belly,
         there were rugs in rows like an otter’s offering;
         and tripods smoked with perfumes of musk and borneol,
         and behind the throne waved fans of pheasant feathers.
It was a scene no whit less splendid than that fairy palace of which the poet sings:

The abode of the Princess has cassia halls and orchid chambers.


‘How is it that this place has no name?’ asked Yuan-chun.
‘This is the principal hall of the Residence, Your Grace. The family dared not give it a
name without consulting you first.
Her Grace nodded.
A eunuch Master of Ceremonies now requested her to seat herself upon a chair of
state in order to receive the obeisances of her family. Music struck up from a band
stationed at either side of the steps as two eunuchs conducted Jia She and Jia Zheng
onto the terrace beneath. The other male members of the family ranged themselves
behind them and the whole party then began to advance in formation up the steps
into the hall.
‘Excused!’
A lady-in-waiting came forward and uttered this single word as an indication that the
Imperial Concubine wished to absolve them from the ceremonial, and with a slight
bow they with?drew.
It was now the turn of Grandmother Jia (‘the Dowager Lady Jia of Rong-guo’ they
called her) and the ladies of the household to make their obeisance. The eunuchs led
them up the steps at the east side of the terrace on to the platform in front of the
hall, where they ranged themselves in order of precedence.
Once more the lady-in-waiting pronounced the absolving word and they, too,
withdrew.
After tea had been offered three times as etiquette prescribed, the Imperial
Concubine descended from her throne, the music stopped, and she withdrew into a
side room to ‘change her clothes’. A less formal carriage than the imperial palanquin
had been prepared which carried her from the garden to her family’s own quarters.
Inside Grandmother Jia’s apartment Yuan-chun became a grandchild once more and
knelt down to make her kotow. But Grandmother Jia and the rest knelt down too and
prevented her from prostrating herself. She ended up, clinging to Grandmother Jia by
one hand and Lady Wang by the other, while the tears streamed down her face, too
overcome to say anything. All three of them, in fact, though there was so much they
wanted to say, seemed quite incapable of speech and stood there holding each other
and sobbing, apparently un?able to stop. The others present— Lady Xing, Li Wan,
Wang Xi-feng, Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun—stood round them weeping silently.
No one spoke a word.
Yuan-chun at last restrained her sobs and forced a smile to her tear-stained face:
‘It hasn’t been easy, winning this chance of coming back among you after all those
years since I was first walled up in That Place. Now that we are seeing each other at
last, we ought to talk and be cheerful, not waste all the time crying! I shall be leaving
again in no time at all, and Heaven only knows when I shall have another chance of
seeing you!’
At this point she broke down once more and had to be comforted by Lady Xing.
When she had composed herself, Grandmother Jia made her sit down while the
members of the family came forward one at a time to greet her and say a few words.
This was an occasion for further tears. Then the senior menservants of both the
Rong-guo and Ning-guo mansions assembled in the courtyard outside and paid their
respects. They were followed by the women servants and maids, who were allowed
to come inside the room to make their kotow.
Yuan-chun asked why her Aunt Xue and her cousins Bao-chai and Lin Dai-yu were
missing.
‘Relations outside the Jia family are not allowed to see you without a special
invitation, dear,’ Lady Wang told her.
Yuan-chun asked them to be invited in immediately, and Aunt Xue and the two girls
arrived after a few moments. They would have kotowed to her in accordance with
court etiquette had not Yuan-chun hurriedly excused them from doing so. The three
of them went up to her, and niece and aunt exchanged news of the years that had
elapsed since they last met.
Next Lutany and the other maids who had accompanied Yuan-chun into the Palace
came forward to make their kotows to Grandmother Jia. The old lady at once
motioned to them to rise and gave instructions to her own servants to entertain
them in another room.
The senior eunuchs and the ladies-in-waiting were now led off by members of the
staffs of Jia She’s household and the Ning-guo mansion to be entertained elsewhere,
leaving only three or four very junior eunuchs in attendance. Yuan-chun was at last
free to chat informally with her mother and the other female members of her family
and learned for the first time about many personal and domestic events that had
occurred in the household since she left it.
Then there was her interview with Jia Zheng, which had to take place with her father
standing outside the door-curtain of the room in which she was sitting. Now that she
was the Emperor’s woman, this was the nearest to her he could ever hope to get.
The sense of deprivation struck home to Yuan-?chun as she addressed him through
the curtain.
‘What is the use of all this luxury and splendour,’ she said bitterly, ‘if I am to be
always separated from those I love —denied the tenderness which even the poorest
peasant who seasons his bread with salt and pickles and dresses in hempen
homespun is free to enjoy?’
With tears in his eyes the good man delivered the following little speech to the
daughter he could not see:
‘Madam.
That a poor and undistinguished household such as ours should have produced, as it
were, a phoenix from amidst a flock of crows and pies to bask in the sunshine of
Imperial favour and shed its reflected beams on the departed representatives of our
ancestral line must be attributable to the concentration in your single person of the
quintessences of all that is most admirable in celestial and terrestrial nature and the
accumulated merit of many generations of our forebears, and is an honour and a
blessing in which my wife and I are proud to be participators.
‘Our beloved Emperor, who embodies in his own Sacred Person those life-giving
forces which are always invisibly at work in the natural cosmos, has showered down
upon his grate?ful subjects a gracious kindness unprecedented in the annals of
recorded history—a kindness which even the expenditure of our life’s blood to the
veriest ultimate drop would be wholly inadequate to repay and which only the most
unremitting pains and unswerving loyalty in the discharge of those duties to which it
has pleased him to call us could adequately express.
‘It is our earnest prayer that His Sacred Majesty may con?tinue long to reign over
us, a blessing to all his peoples; and that Your Grace should feel no anxiety
concerning the welfare of my wife and myself during our now declining years, but
should rather cherish and sustain your own precious person, in order to be the better
able to serve His Sacred Majesty with care and diligence, seeking by that service to
be worthy of the tender regard and loving favour which he has been graciously
pleased to bestow upon you.’
To this formal speech the Imperial Concubine made a formal reply:
‘Sir. It is of course desirable that you should exercise the utmost diligence when
engaged upon business of state, but it is to be hoped that you will take sufficient care
of your own well-being whenever not so engaged, and will under no circumstances
vex yourself with anxiety on our behalf.’
‘The inscriptions at present displayed on the pavilions and other buildings in the
garden were composed by Bao-yu,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘If there are any places in the
garden which particularly take your fancy, we hope you will name them for us.’
The news that Bao-yu could already compose inscriptions evoked a smile of pleasure.
‘He has made progress, then!’
Jia Zheng withdrew.
‘But why is Bao-yu not with us?’ she added.
‘The menfolk of the family are not supposed to see you without special reason,’
Grandmother Jia explained.
Yuan-hun at once gave orders that he should be summoned, and presently he was
brought in by one of the little eunuchs. When he had completed his kotow she called
him over, and stretching Out her arms, drew him to her bosom where she held him in
a close embrace, stroking his hair and fondling the back of his neck.
‘What a lot you have grown---!’ she began. But the rest was drowned in a flood of
tears.
You-shi and Xi-feng now approached to announce that a feast awaited her in the
Separate Residence. Yuan-chun rose to her feet, and bidding Bao-yu lead the way,
walked with the rest of the company to the gate of the garden. There, in the light of
the innumerable lanterns, all kinds of spectacles had been prepared for her
entertainment. The route led through ‘The Phoenix Dance’, ‘Fragrant Red and Lucent
Green’, ‘The Hopeful Sign’, and ‘The Garden of Spices’. This time the inspection was
no perfunctory one. Yuan-chun insisted on looking inside the buildings and climbing
up and down their stairs. She crossed bridges, she walked round each tiny ‘mountain’,
and every once in a while she stopped to look about her and admire the view. All the
places she visited were so beautifully furnished and so ingeniously planned, that she
could not conceal her delight. But there was a faint note of censure in her praise
‘You really mustn’t be so extravagant in future. This is far too much!’
They had now come to the main hall. Having first decreed that they should dispense
with court etiquette—which would have prevented the older ladies from sitting
down at all—she took her place at the main table, while Grandmother Jia and the
rest sat at little tables on either side, and You-shi, Li Wan and Xi-feng moved to and
fro, dispensing wine and helping with the service.
While they were still drinking, Yuan-chun sent for writing materials, and taking up a
brush, began in her own hand to write out some names for the parts of the garden
she had liked the best. The name she chose for the garden as a whole was ‘Prospect
Garden’, and she composed the following couplet to go outside the main reception
hall:

For all earth to share, his great compassion has been extended,
that children and humble folk may gratefully rejoice.
For all ages to admire, his noble institutions have been promoted,
that people of every land and clime may joyfully exult.

She altered ‘The Phoenix Dance’ to ‘The Naiad’s House’, and she renamed ‘Fragrant
Red and Lucent Green’ ‘Crimson Joys and Green Delights’ and named the building in
its grounds ‘The House of Green Delights’. The buildings belonging to ‘The Garden of
Spices’ she named ‘All-spice Court’. Those of ‘The Hopeful Sign’ she gave the name
‘Washbrook Farm’. The main hall became ‘Prospect Hall’ with separate names for the
high galleries on either side: ‘The Painted Chamber’ for the one on the east side, ‘The
Fragrance Gallery’ for the one on the west. Among the other names which she
invented for various other parts of the garden were:
‘The Smartweed Loggia’, ‘The Lotus Pavilion’, ‘Amaryllis Eyot’, and ‘Duckweed
Island’. She also composed inscrip?tions for some of its prospects, including
‘Pear-tree blossom in springtime rain’, ‘Paulownia leaves in autumn wind’, and
‘Rushes in the winter snow’. The couplets composed by Bao-yu were to remain
unaltered.
Having finished with the inscriptions, she proceeded to write out the following
quatrain of her own composition:

Embracing hills and streams, with skill they wrought:
Their work at last is to perfection brought.
Earth’s fairest prospects all are here installed,
So ‘Prospect Garden’ let its name be called!


‘There!’ she said with a smile to the girls. ‘I’m no genius, as you all well know, and I
have never been much of a poet. But tonight I thought I really must write something,
for this beautiful garden’s sake. Later on, when I have more time to spare, I intend to
write a Description of Prospect Garden and a set of verses to be entitled The
Visitation in commemoration of this wonderful night. But meanwhile I should like
each of you girls to compose an inscription that could be used somewhere in the
garden, and also a poem to go with it. Just write anything that comes into your heads.
I don’t want you to restrict yourselves by trying to make your poems in any way
relate to my own poor effort. As for Bao-yu: I am very pleased that he is able to
compose verses so well, and I want him to write me an octet for each of the four
places in the garden I like best: the Naiad’s House, All-spice Court - those are my two
favourites—the House of Green Delights, and Washbrook Farm. The couplets he has
already written for them are very good, but these are four such special places, that I
feel they deserve to have something more written about them. And apart from that,
if Bao-yu can show me these four poems while I am here, I shall feel that the efforts I
made at teaching him when he was a little boy were worth while.’
Bao-yu could scarcely refuse, and went off to rack his brains for some good lines.
Tan-chun was by far the most gifted of the Three Springs and joined Bao-chai and
Dai-yu in writing octets. Li Wan, Ying-chun and Xi-chun, none of whom had any talent
for versification, contented themselves with a quatrain apiece, but found even four
lines a considerable effort.
When the girls had all finished, Yuan-chun took up the papers one by one and
examined the results of their labours. Here is what they had written:

Ying-chun: Heart’s Ease

        The garden finished, all its prospects please.
        Bidden to write, I name this spot ‘Heart’s Ease’.
        Who would have thought on earth such scenes to find
        As here refresh the heart and ease the mind?

*

Tan-chun: Brightness and Grace

        Water on hills and hills on waters smile,
        More bright and graceful than the Immortal Isle.
        Midst odorous herbs the singer’s green fan hides;
        Her crimson skirt through falling petals glides.
        A radiant jewel to the world is shown,
        A fairy princess from her tower come down:
        And since her steps the garden’s walks have trod,
        No mortal foot must desecrate its sod.

*

Xi-chun: Art the Creator

        The garden’s landscape far and wide outspreads;
        High in the clouds its buildings raise their heads;
        Serene in moonlight, radiant in the sun—
        Great Nature’s handiwork has been outdone!
*

Li Wan: All Things Bright and Beautiful

        The finished garden is a wondrous sight.
        Unlettered and unskilled, I blush to write.
        Its marvels are not in one phrase expressed,
        Yet ‘Bright and Beautiful’ I judge the best.

*

Xue Bao-chai: Auspicious Skies

    West of imperial walls the garden lies;
    The sun beams on it from auspicious skies.
    Its willows orioles from the vale invite;
    Tall bamboos tempt the phoenix to alight.
    Poetic arts this night must celebrate
    Filial affection dressed in robes of state.
    Dare I, who have those jewelled phrases read,
    Add more to what She has already said?

*

Lin Dai-yu: The Fairy Stream

    To fairy haunts far from the world’s annoy
    A royal visit brings a double joy.
    A thousand borrowed beauties here combined
    In this new setting new enchantment find.
    Its odours sweet a poet’s wine enrich;
    Its flowers a queenly visitor bewitch.
    May she and we this favour hope to gain:
    That oft-times she may pass this way again!

*
As soon as she had finished reading the poems, Yuan-chun praised them all warmly.
‘But Cousin Lin’s and Cousin Xue’s poems are specially good,’ she said. ‘Our Jia girls
are no match for them!’
Dai-yu had confidently expected that this night would give her an opportunity of
deploying her talents to the full and amazing everyone with her genius. It was very
disappointing that no more had been required of her than a single little poem and an
inscription; and though she was obliged to confine her?self to what the Imperial
Concubine had commanded, she had composed her octet without enthusiasm and in
a very per?functory manner.
Meanwhile Bao-yu was far from finished with his consignment. He had finished
composing the poems for the Naiad’s House and All-spice Court and was still in the
middle of a poem on the House of Green Delights. Bao-chai took a peep over his
shoulder and noticed that his draft contained the line

Some wear sheathed skirts of lucent green curled tight.

When no one was looking she gave him a nudge:
‘You can tell Her Grace didn’t like “lucent green” because she only lust now altered
it to something else in your inscrip?tion. If you insist on using it in your poem, it will
look as if you are deliberately flaunting your difference of opinion. There are so many
allusions to plantain leaves you could use, you shouldn’t have much difficulty in
substituting something else.’
‘It’s all very well for you to talk,’ said Bao-yu, mopping the perspiration from his
brow, ‘but at this particular moment I can’t think of any allusion that would do.’
‘Why don’t you put “in spring green waxen sheaths” in place of your “sheathed
skirts of lucent green”?’
‘Where do you get “green waxen” from?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Tut, tut, tut!’ Bao-chai shook her head pityingly. ‘If this is what you are like tonight,
Heaven knows what you’ll be like in a few years’ time when you come to take the
Palace Examina?tion. Probably you’ll find you have forgotten even the Child’s First
Primer of Rhyming Names. It’s from the Tang poet Qian Xu’s poem “Furled Plantains”:

Green waxen candles from which no flames rise.

Do you mean to say you’ve forgotten that?’
The scales fell from Bao-yu’s eyes.
‘Good gracious, how stupid of me! The words are there ready-made and I didn’t
think of them! I shall have to call you my “One Word Teacher”, like the poet in the
story! I shan’t be able to treat you like a sister any more, I shall have to say “sir”
when I speak to you!’
‘Sister!’ said Bao-chai with a little laugh. ‘Stop fooling about and get on with your
poem! That’s your sister, sitting up there in the golden robe. I’m no sister of yours!’
Fearing that he would waste more time if she stayed, she slipped quietly away.
The poem finished, Bao-yu had now completed three out of the four commanded. At
this point Dai-yu, who was still full of dissatisfaction because her talent had been
under?employed, noticed that Bao-yu was struggling and came over to the table at
which he was working. Observing that ‘The Hopeful Sign’ still remained to be done,
she told him to get on with the copying out in fair of the three poems he had already
completed while she thought of something for ‘The Hopeful Sign’. When she had
completed a poem in her head, she scribbled it out on a piece of paper, screwed it
into a little ball, and tossed it in front of him. Bao-yu smoothed it out on the table
and read it through. It seemed to him to be ten times better than the ones he had
written himself. He copied it out in neat kai-shu after the other three and handed the
finished task to Yuan-chun for her inspection.
This is what she read:

The Phoenix Dance

                 Perfected now at last, this place is fit
                 For Bird of Paradise to enter it.
             Bach graceful wand lets fall a dewy tear;
             Each glossy leaf breathes coolness on the air.
             Through narrow-parted blocks the pent stream leaps;
             Through chinks of blind the incense thinly seeps.
             Let none the checkered shade with violence rude
             Disrupting, on the slumberer’s dreams intrude!

*

The Garden of Spices

             Fragrance of flower-drifts in these quiet confines
             Mingles with headier scents of eglantines,
             And summer’s herbs in a soft, spicy bed
             Their aromatic perfumes subtly spread.
             Light mist half screens the winding walks from view,
            Where chilly verdure soaks the clothes with dew.
            Here, slumbering quietly at the fountain’s side,
            The dreaming poet all day long may bide.

*

The House of Green Delight

            In this quiet plot, where peace reigns through the year,
            Bewitching ladies rank on rank appear:
            Some wear in spring green waxen sheaths curled tight,
            Some carmine caps, that are not doffed at night.
            Some from the trellis trail their purple sleeves,
            Some lean on rocks, where thin mists cool their leaves.
            Their Mistress, standing in the soft summer breeze,
            Finds quiet content in everything she sees.

*

The Hopeful Sign

            An inn-sign, through the orchards half-discerned,
            Promises shelter and a drink well-earned.
            Through water-weeds the pond’s geese make their way;
            Midst elms and mulberry-trees the swallows play.
            The garden’s chives are ready to prepare;
            The scent of young rice perfumes all the air.
            When want is banished, as in times like these,
            The spinner and the ploughman take their ease.

Yuan-chun was genuinely delighted.
‘You really have made progress!’ she said. She singled out ‘The Hopeful Sign’ as the
best of the four and changed the name ‘Washbrook Farm’ back to ‘Sweet-rice Village’
by way of acknowledgement. She made Tan-chun copy all ten poems -- Bao-yu’s and
the girls’ -- on to a sheet of fancy paper and sent a eunuch to show it to the
gentlemen outside. Jia Zheng and the others were very complimentary, and Jia Zheng
presented a eulogy of his own composition entitled The Visitation. Yuan-chun also
ordered Bao-yu and Jia Lan to be given presents of junket and mince, both of some
special kind only made in the Imperial kitchens. At this period Jia Lan was still only a
very little boy and did not really know what was going on. He was taken by his
mother Li Wan into Yuan-chun’s presence and stood beside his uncle Bao-yu to make
his little bow of thanks.
All this time Jia Qiang and his troupe of girl players had been waiting impatiently
below for an order to begin their performance. Just as they were reaching a peak of
impatience, a eunuch came running down to them.
‘They’ve finished writing poems,’ he said. ‘Quick, give me a play-bill!’
Jia Qiang hurriedly handed him a list of the pieces they had rehearsed, together with
a brochure containing the stage names of each of the twelve players and some notes
on the parts which each of them played. Four pieces were chosen: ‘Shi-fan
Entertains’ from The Handful of Snow, ‘The Double Seventh’ from The Palace of
Eternal Youth, ‘The Meeting of the Immortals’ from The Han-dan Road and Li-niang’s
death-scene from The Return of the Soul. Jia Qiang supervised the prepara?tions,
and soon the rock-splitting little voices and spell-bind?ing movements of the
actresses had taken over, and the stage was full of passions which were no whit less
overwhelming for being counterfeit.
No sooner had they finished than a eunuch came round, bearing a variety of fancy
cakes and sweetmeats on a gilded salver.
‘Which is “Charmante”?’ he asked, referring to the stage name of the little
soubrette who had played the part of Li?-niang’s maid in The Return of the Soul and
a dashing young huntsman in the ‘play within a play’ in The Handful of Snow.
Jia Qiang realized that the confectionery was a present for the little actress, and
taking the salver from the eunuch, made Mademoiselle Charmante come forward
and kotow her thanks.
‘Her Grace says that she enjoyed Mademoiselle Charmante’s performance the most
and would like to see her in two more pieces,’ said the eunuch. ‘She may choose any
two she likes.’
Having replied to the eunuch, Jia Qiang told Charmante that she ought to play two
more pieces from The Return of the Soul: ‘The Walk in the Garden’ and ‘The Dream’.
But neither had a part suitable for a soubrette in it, and Charmante obdurately
refused. She said she would do ‘The Assignation’ and ‘The Altercation’ from The
Bracelet and the Comb, in which the part of the pert young maidservant would allow
her comic talent a fuller scope. Jia Qiang failed to talk her out of this decision and
had to let her do as she wished. Yuan-chun was delighted, and gave special
instructions that Charmante was to be well treated and to have the best possible
training. She also awarded her, over and above her share of the presents that the
whole troupe would receive in commemoration of her visit, two dress-lengths of
tribute satin, two embroidered purses, and some miniature gold and silver ingots.
The feast was now cleared away and Yuan-chun recom?menced her tour of the
garden, visiting those places which she had not had time to look at before dinner.
When they came to the little convent nestling under its hill, she washed her hands
and entered the shrine-hall to offer incense and pray before the image of the Buddha.
She also wrote an inscription for the board which hung above the image:

THE SHIP OF MERCY ON THE SEA OF SUFFERING

and gave instructions for various extra presents to be bestowed on the little nuns in
addition to those which, along with all the other members of the household, they
were already due to receive in commemoration of her visit.
A list for the latter had already been drawn up and presently it was submitted to
Yuan-chun by a kneeling eunuch for her approval. After reading through it in silence
she approved its contents and asked that they should be distributed forthwith. The
presents distributed were as follows:

To Grandmother Jia:
one golden ru-yi sceptre
one jade ditto
a staff of carved aloeswood
a rosary of putchuk beads
four lengths of ‘Fu Gui Chang Chun’ tribute satin
four lengths of ‘Fu Shou Mian Chang’ tribute silk
ten medallions of red gold with a design showing an
ingot, a writing-brush and a sceptre (which in the
riddling rebus-language used by the makers of
such objects meant ‘All your heart’s desire’)
ten silver medallions with a design showing a stone?-
chime flanked by a pair of little fish (carrying the
rebus-message ‘Blessings in abundance’)

Lady Xing, Lady Wang and Aunt Xue each received the same selection of gifts as
Grandmother Jia with the omission of the sceptres, staff and rosary.

To Jia Jing, Jia She and Jia Zheng (each):
two new books of His Imperial Majesty’s own composition
two boxes of ink-sticks (collector’s pieces)
one solid gold wine-cup
one solid silver ditto
silks and satins as above.

To Bao-yu, Dai-yu, Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun (each):
one new book
one inkstone (collector’s piece)
two specially designed medallions in gold
two ditto in silver

To Bao-yu and Jia Lan (each):
one gold necklet
one silver ditto
two gold medallions
two silver ditto

To You-shi, Li Wan and Xi-feng (each):
two gold medallions
two silver ditto
four dress-lengths of tribute silk

(Also twenty-four lengths of silk and one hundred strings of unmixed Imperial Mint
copper cash for the women-servants and maids in attendance on Grandmother Jia,
Lady Wang and the girls)

To Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian, Jia Huan and Jia Rong (each):
one length of tribute satin
one gold medallion
one silver ditto

There were also a hundred bales of variegated satins, a thousand taels of silver and
an unspecified number of bottles of Palace wine for the senior servants of the Rong
and Ning Mansions and Separate Residence responsible for construction and
maintenance, attendance, theatre management, and light?ing, and an additional five
hundred strings of unmixed Im?perial Mint copper cash for the cooks, entertainers
and Miscellaneous.

When all had expressed their thanks, one of the eunuchs in charge announced that it
was a quarter to three and time for Her Grace to return to the Palace. At once
Yuan-chun’s eyes filled with tears, and even though she forced herself to smile, she
was unable to prevent a few drops from falling. Clinging to Grandmother Jia and Lady
Wang as if she would never let them go, she begged them again and again not to
grieve for her.
‘Now you mustn’t worry about me, my dears: just look after yourselves! Thanks to
the Emperor’s kindness, we are now allowed visits in the Palace once a month: so
you see we can see each other quite easily. It is silly of us to be so upset! And if His
Majesty is gracious enough to permit another Visitation next year you really mustn’t
be so extravagant again on my account!’
Grandmother Jia and the others were now sobbing audibly and were much too
overcome to reply. But Yuan-chun, how?ever hard it was to leave her family, dared
not infringe the regulations of the Imperial Household, and steeled herself to
re-enter the palanquin which was to carry her away. It was all the rest of the family
could do to restrain Grandmother Jia from making a scene, and when she was
somewhat calmed, she and Lady Wang had to be led weeping from the garden in a
state of near-collapse.
What followed will be told in the next chapter.
CHAPTER 19



A very earnest young woman offers
counsel by night
And a very endearing one is found to
be a source of fragrance by day



On the day following the Imperial Concubine’s return to the Palace, she called on the
Emperor to offer thanks and gave him a full account of her Visitation. The Emperor
was visibly pleased by her report and commanded that bounties of gold, silver and
silks should be issued to Jia Zheng and the other fathers of visiting ladies by the Inner
Treasury.
But there is no need for us to pursue these matters in further detail.

*

The events of the last few days had taxed the energies of all the inmates of the
Ning-guo and Rong-guo mansions to the utmost, and by now all of them were feeling
both physically and mentally exhausted. Even so, Xi-feng forced herself to supervise
the taking down and storing away of all the decora?tions and other movables from
the garden—an operation which took another two or three days to accomplish.
Xi-feng’s duties and responsibilities were so many that she could not evade them and
seek recuperation in rest and quiet as the others did. At the same time, however, the
anxiety to be thought well of and the shrinking fear of criticism that were a part of
her nature made her take pains, even when she was at her busiest, to appear
outwardly as idle and unoccupied as the rest.
Of those idle and unoccupied rest, the idlest and most un?occupied was Bao-yu. On
this particular morning, Aroma’s mother had been round first thing to report to
Grandmother Jia that she was taking her daughter home for a New Year’s party and
would not be bringing her back until late that even?ing. After her departure Bao-yu
played ‘Racing Go’ with the other maids. This was a game in which you moved your
Go-?piece across the board in accordance with the throw of dice, the object being to
reach the opposite side before everyone else and pocket all the stakes.
He was already tired of sitting indoors and was beginning to find the game boring,
when one of the maids told him that someone had just been round from Cousin
Zhen’s inviting him over to the other house to see their New Year lanterns and to join
them in watching some plays. Bao-yu told the maids to fetch his going-out clothes
and help him change. As he was on the point of leaving, someone arrived with a
present of sweetened koumiss from the Imperial Concubine. He re?membered how
much Aroma had enjoyed this drink last time they had had some, and asked them to
put it by for her. Then, having first called on Grandmother Jia to tell her he was
leav?ing, he went over to the other house to watch the players.
The plays they were performing turned out to be very noisy ones: Ding-lang Finds His
Father, Huang Bo-yang and the Ghostly Army, Monkey Makes War in Heaven and The
Investiture of the Gods. All of them, but especially the last two, seemed to involve
much rushing in and out of supernatural beings, and the sound of drums and
cymbals and blood-curdling battle-cries, as they whirled into combat across the stage
with banners flying and weapons flashing or invoked the names of the Buddha with
waving of burning joss-sticks, was positively deafening. It carried into the street
outside, where the passers-by smiled appreciatively and told each other that only a
family like the Jias could afford theatricals that produced so satisfying a volume of
noise.
To Bao-yu, however, a little of this kind of thing was more than enough, and after
sitting for a short while with the rest, he drifted off to seek his amusement elsewhere.
To begin with he went inside and spent some time in bantering conver?sation with
You-shi and the maids and concubines in the women’s quarters. When he went off
once more through the inner gate, the women assumed that he was going back to
the play and made no attempt to detain him. The menfolk —Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian,
Xue Pan and the rest—were engrossed in games of guess-fingers and other convivial
aids to drunkenness, and if they noticed his absence at all, assumed that he was
inside with the ladies and did not comment on it.
As for the pages who had accompanied him: the older ones, estimating that he had
almost certainly come over for the day, gave themselves time off to gamble and drink
with their cronies of to visit friends and relations outside, confident that if they
returned in the evening they would be in time for Bao-yu’s departure. The younger
ones wormed their way into the green-room to watch the excitement and get in the
way of the actors. Bao-yu was left without a single one of them in attendance.
Finding himself alone, he began thinking about a certain painting he remembered
having seen in Cousin Zhen’s ‘smaller study’. It was a very life-like portrait of a
beautiful woman. While everyone was celebrating, he reflected, she was sure to have
been left on her own and would perhaps be feeling lonely. He would go and have a
look at her and cheer her up.
But as he approached the study, he experienced a sudden thrill of fright. A gentle
moaning could be heard coming from inside it.
‘Good gracious!’ he thought. ‘Can the woman in the painting really have come to
life?’
He made a tiny hole in the paper window with his tongue and peeped through. It was
no painted lady he saw, stepped down from her hanging scroll upon the wall, but
Tealeaf, pressed upon the body of a girl and evidently engaged in those exercises in
which Bao-yu had once been instructed by the firry Disenchantment.
‘Good lord!’
He cried out involuntarily, and kicking open the door, strode into the study, so
startling the two inside that they shook in their clothes. Seeing that it was Bao-yu,
Tealeaf at once fell upon his knees and begged for mercy.
‘In broad daylight!’ said Bao-yu. ‘What do you think you’re at? If Mr Zhen got to
hear of this, it would be more than your life is worth.’
As he spoke, his eye fell upon the girl. She had a soft, white skin, to whose charms he
could not be insensible. At the moment she was red to the very tips of her ears and
stood there in silence, hanging her head with shame. Bao-yu stamped his foot
impatiently:
‘Why don’t you go?’
The words seemed to bring her to herself, for she turned and fled immediately.
Bao-yu ran after her, shouting.
‘Don’t be afraid! I won’t tell anyone!’
Tealeaf, running out behind him, was frantic:
‘My dear little grandfather, that’s exactly what you are doing!’
‘How old is she?’ Bao-yu asked him.
‘Not more than fifteen or so,’ said Tealeaf.
‘You don’t even know her age!’ said Bao-yu. ‘You can do this to her without even
knowing her age! She’s wasted on you, that’s evident. Poor girl! What’s her name?’
‘Ah now, that’s quite a story,’ said Tealeaf with a broad smile. ‘She says that just
before she was born her mother dreamed she saw a beautiful piece of brocade,
woven in all the colours of the rainbow, with a pattern of lucky swastikas all over it.
So when she was born, she gave her the name “Swastika”.’
Bao-yu smiled back.
‘She ought to have a lucky future ahead of her, then. shall I ask them tomorrow if
you can have her for your wife?’
Tealeaf thought this was a huge joke.
‘Why aren’t you watching the plays, Master Bao?’ he asked. ‘They’re ever so good!’
‘I did watch for quite a while,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but I got rather deafened and came out
to walk around for a bit. That’s how I found you here. But what are we going to do
now?’
Tealeaf gave a sly little smile:
‘What about going for a ride outside the city? If we slipped off quietly we could get
there and back without anyone knowing.’
‘Too risky,’ said Bao-yu. ‘We might get kidnapped or something. Besides, there
would be terrible trouble if they found out. It’d better be somewhere nearer, so that
we can get back quickly.’
‘Who do we know near here that we could call on?’ said Tealeaf. ‘I can’t think of
anyone.’
‘I know,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Why don’t we go round to the Huas’ house and see what
Aroma is up to?’
‘All right. But I’ve forgotten where they live,’ said Tealeaf untruthfully. ‘And suppose
they do find out you’ve been gadding around outside’ (he added the real reason for
his hesitation) ‘they’ll say I put you up to it, and I shall get a beating.’
‘I’ll see you don’t get into trouble,’ said Bao-yu.
Reassured, Tealeaf fetched the horse, and the two of them slipped out by the back
entrance.
Luckily the Huas’ house was only a few hundred yards from the Ning-guo mansion,
and in no time at all they had reached its gate. Tealeaf entered first and called out the
name of Aroma’s elder brother, Hua Zi-fang.
Aroma’s mother was not long back from collecting the various nieces, on both her
own and her late husband’s side of the family, who had had to be fetched after she
had been to call for Aroma, and the family had only just settled down to their tea
when they heard this voice outside calling for Hua Zi-fang. To the latter’s
considerable surprise and mystification he found, on going outside to look, his
sister’s young master waiting at the gate with a servant. Having first lifted Bao-yu off
his horse, he went back into the courtyard and bawled to the rest inside:
‘It’s Master Bao!’
Aroma was dumbfounded and came running out to discover the cause of this
unaccountable visit. As soon as she saw him she clung to him anxiously:
‘What is it? Are you all right?’
Bao-yu laughed carelessly.
‘I was just feeling bored, so I came over to see what you were up to.’
‘Stupid!’ said Aroma, relieved to find that nothing was amiss. ‘What did you think I
would be up to?’
She turned to Tealeaf.
‘Who else is with you?’
‘Nobody,’ said Tealeaf with a grin. ‘Nobody else knows we’re here.’
At this Aroma became alarmed once more.
‘That’s terrible! Suppose you were to run into someone? Suppose you were to
meet the Master?’ She glanced at Bao-yu fearfully. ‘In any case, the streets are so
crowded now. You could easily get ridden down or something. It would be no joke if
you were to have an accident. You two certainly have a nerve!’ She turned to Tealeaf
again. ‘You put him up to this, didn’t you? Wait till I get back: I’ll tell his nannies
about you. They’ll have you flogged like a felon, see if they don’t!’
Tealeaf pulled a face.
‘Don’t go trying to pin the blame on me! Master Bao was cursing and swearing at
me to make me go with him. I kept telling him not to come. Anyway, we’d better be
going back now, if that’s the way you feel!’
‘You might as well stay, now you’re here,’ said Hua Zi-fang in a conciliatory manner.
‘There’s no point in quarrelling about it. The only trouble is, this is not much of a
place we live in here: poor and cramped and not too clean and that. Hardly a fit place
for the likes of Master Bao, I’m thinking.’
By this time Aroma’s mother had joined them outside to welcome the visitors. Aroma
took Bao-yu by the hand and led him in. He saw four or five girls sitting down inside
who hung their heads and blushed when he entered. Despite their blushes, Hua
Zi-fang and his mother insisted that Bao-yu should get up on the kang with them, as
they were afraid that he would find their house cold. Having installed him on the
kang, they bustled to and fro fetching things to eat and pour?ing tea.
‘Now don’t you two rush about, Mother,’ said Aroma. ‘I know how to look after him.
There’s no point in your giving him a lot of things he won’t be able to eat.’
As she said this, she took her own cushion that she had been sitting on, put it on top
of a little short-legged kang table, and made Bao-yu sit on it with his feet on her
metal foot-warmer. Then she took a couple of rose-shaped perfume lozenges from a
little purse she was wearing, opened up her hand-warmer, popped the lozenges onto
the burning charcoal, and closing it up again, stuffed it into the front of his gown.
Having at last got him settled comfortably and to her own satisfaction, she served
him with tea which she poured out for him into her own cup.
Hua Zi-fang and his mother had by now finished laying an elaborate tea. The cakes,
nuts and dried fruits were arranged on their plates, and the plates themselves on the
table, with painstaking attention to symmetry and design. Aroma could tell at a
glance that there was nothing there which Bao-yu could possibly be expected to eat.
But her family must not be offended.
‘Since you’ve decided to come,’ she said to Bao-yu with a smile. ‘we can’t let you go
without having tasted something of ours. You’ll have to try something, just to be able
to say that you have been our guest!’
She took a handful of pine nuts from one of the dishes on the table, and blowing
away the skins, handed them to him on her handkerchief.
Bao-yu noticed that Aroma’s eyes were slightly red and that there were recent
tear-stains on her powdered cheeks.
‘Why have you been crying?’ He spoke the words in an undertone as she handed
him the pine nuts.
‘Who’s been crying?’ said Aroma with a feigned laugh. ‘I’ve lust been rubbing my
eyes.’
Her little fiction was successful, for he made no further comment.
Bao-yu was wearing his dark-red gown with the pattern of golden dragons and white
fox-fur lining, and a sable-lined slate-blue jacket with fringed edges.
‘Fancy!’ said Aroma, ‘you got yourself all dressed up lust to come and see us. Didn’t
anyone ask you where you were going?’
‘No,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Actually I changed because I was going to Cousin Zhen’s. He
invited me over to watch the players.’
Aroma nodded.
‘You’d better go back after you’ve sat a bit longer,’ she said. ‘This is really no place
for you here.’
‘You shouldn’t be too long, either,’ said Bao-yu with a smile. ‘I’ve got something
nice waiting for you when you get back.’
‘Sh!’ said Aroma. ‘Do you want them all to hear you?’
As she said this, she reached out and took the Magic Jade from his neck.
‘Here’s something that will interest you all,’ she said, holding it out to the others.
‘You know how often you’ve spoken about that wonderful lade of Master Bao’s and
said how much you’d give for a look at it? Well, here it is! Now you can look to your
heart’s content. There you are, that’s all it is! Not so wonderful, really, is it?’
They passed it from hand to hand, and when it had gone full circle and all had
examined it, she hung it once more round his neck.
Aroma told her elder brother to go out and hire the cleanest, smartest-looking cab he
could find to take Bao-yu home in.
‘I can see him safely back,’ said Hua Zi-fang. ‘He won’t come to any harm on
horseback.’
‘It’s not a question of whether he’ll come to any harm or not,’ said Aroma ‘I’m
afraid someone might see him.’
Hua Zi-fang hurried out to hire a cab. The rest of the com?pany, realizing that Bao-yu
had no real business to be there, made no effort to detain him and rose to see him
off. Aroma snatched up a handful of sweetmeats for Tealeaf. She also gave him a few
coppers to buy fireworks with.
‘Mind you don’t tell anyone about this visit!’ she said. ‘You’ll be in trouble yourself
if they find out about it.
She escorted Bao-yu to the gate and saw him into the cab, pulling the blind down on
him as soon as he was inside. Tealeaf and her brother followed behind it with the
horse. When they arrived outside the Ning-guo mansion, Tealeaf told the cabbie to
stop.
‘We’d better go in here for a bit before going home,’ he explained to Aroma’s
brother. ‘Otherwise they might get suspicious.’
Hua Zi-fang acknowledged the sense of this precaution, and lifting Bao-yu from the
cab, helped him up on to his horse.
‘Thank you for your trouble,’ said Bao-yu with a winning smile as he rode into the
rear gate of the Ning-guo mansion.
And there, for the time being, we shall leave him.

*

When Bao-yu left his room for the other mansion, his maids were free to do exactly
as they liked and threw themselves into their amusements with great abandon. Some
played at Racing Go, some at Dice and Dominoes. Everywhere a litter of the spat-out
skins of melon-seeds bore silent testimony to their indulgence.
It was unfortunate that Nannie Li should have chosen such a moment to come
stomping in, stick in hand, to call on Bao-yu and to inquire how he was getting on.
She could see that Bao-yu was out, and the uproar created in his absence by the
maids was deeply offensive to her.
‘Now that I’ve left service and don’t come in very often,’ she said with a sigh, ‘you
girls have got worse than ever. The other nannies can do nothing with you. And as for
Bao-yu: he’s like a six-foot lamp stand that lights up others but stays dark itself; for
he’s always on about how dirty other people are, but look at the mess he allows you
to make of his own room! It’s a disgrace!’
Now the maids all knew that Bao-yu did not care about such matters. They also knew
that Nannie Li was pensioned off now and had no more power over them. They
therefore con?tinued with their fun and took no notice of her. But Nannie Li was not
to be ignored. ‘How is Bao-yu eating nowadays?’ ‘what time does he go to bed?’ She
plied the maids with questions which they answered either cheekily or not at all. One
of them even said, quite audibly and in her hearing, ‘Old nuisance!’
‘What’s in this covered bowl?’ Nannie Li went on. ‘It’s junket, isn’t it? Why don’t
you offer it to me?’ She picked up the gift of koumiss and began to drink it.
‘Don’t you touch that!’ said one of the maids. ‘He was keeping that for Aroma. He’ll
be angry when he gets back and finds out about that. You’d better tell him yourself
you took it. We don’t want you getting us into trouble!’
Nannie Li was angry and embarrassed at one and the same time.
‘I won’t believe it of him,’ she said. ‘I won’t believe he would be so wicked as to
grudge his old Nannie a bowl of milk. Why, he owes it to me. And not only a bowl of
milk, either. Much more precious things than that. Do you mean to tell me that
Aroma counts for more with him than I do? He ought to stop and ask himself how he
grew up to be the big boy he is today. It’s my milk he sucked, that came from my own
heart’s blood: that’s what he grew up on. And you mean to tell me that now, if I drink
one little bowlful of his milk—cow’s milk—he’s going to be angry with me? Well, I will
drink it, so there! He can do what he likes about it. And as for that Aroma. I don’t
know what sort of a wonderful creature you think she is -- a little bit of a girl I picked
out myself and trained with my own hand!’
Defiantly she applied the koumiss once more to her lip and downed it to the last
gulp.
One of the maids, politer than the rest, attempted to placate her:
‘They shouldn’t talk to you like that, Nannie! I’m not surprised you are cross. Of
course Bao-yu isn’t going to upset himself over a little thing like that. He’s much more
likely to send something nice round to you when he hears that you’ve been to see
him.’
‘Don’t you try wheedling me with your airs and graces, young woman!’ said Nannie
Li implacably. ‘You think I don’t know about Snowpink being dismissed that time over
the tea? You needn’t worry. If he makes a fuss about it tomorrow, I shall take the
blame.’
She went off in dudgeon.
Presently Bao-yu returned and sent someone off to fetch Aroma. He noticed
Skybright lying motionless on the daybed.
‘What’s the matter with her?’ he asked. ‘Is she ill? Or has she lost the game?’
‘She was winning,’ said Ripple. ‘Then Nannie Li came along and put her off her
stroke and she started losing. She got so cross that she had to go and lie down.’
‘You shouldn’t all take the old girl so seriously,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Just leave her to do as
she likes and take no notice!’
Just at that moment Aroma arrived and said ‘hullo’ to everyone. She asked Bao-yu
where he had eaten and what time he had got back. She also gave her mother’s
regards to the other maids. When she had finished changing out of her holiday attire
and taken the ‘going-out’ ornaments from her hair, Bao-yu asked someone to fetch
the koumiss. There was a chorus of replies from the maids:
‘Nannie Li drank it!’
Bao-yu was about to say something when Aroma cut in with a smile:
‘So that’s what you were saving for me! It was a very kind thought; but last time I
had some of that stuff I took too much, being so fond of it, and gave myself a terrible
stomachache. It didn’t go away until I’d brought it all up again, and it’s put me off it
ever since. It’s a good job really that she did drink it. It would only have got left
around and gone bad. Now what I’d really fancy are some dried chestnuts, if you’d
like to be peeling them for me while I make up your bed on the king.’
Bao-yu was completely taken in by this little ruse, and forgetting all about the
koumiss, went off for some chestnuts and sat down by the lamp to peel them. He
and Aroma were flow alone in the room together. Glancing up with a smile from his
peeling he said,
‘What relation of yours was that girl in the red dress today?’
‘That’s my mother’s sister’s child.’
Bao-yu made appreciative noises.
‘What are you “oo-ing” and “ah-ing” about?’ said Aroma. ‘No, don’t tell me! I know
how your mind works. You think she’s not good enough to wear red.’
‘No. On the contrary,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If she’s not good enough to wear red, I
shouldn’t think anyone is. No, I was merely thinking what a beautiful girl she is and
how nice it would be if we could have her to live with us here.’
‘Because I have the misfortune to be a slave,’ Aroma said bitterly, ‘does that mean
that all my relations ought to be slaves too? I suppose you think every pretty girl you
see is just waiting to be bought so that she can be a servant in your house?hold!’
‘How touchy you are!’ said Bao-yu. ‘Having her to live with us doesn’t have to mean
as a servant, does it? It could mean as a bride.’
‘Thank you, I’m sure!’ said Aroma. ‘But my folk are not quite grand enough for
that!’
Bao-yu was unwilling to pursue a conversation that had become so unpleasant and
went on peeling in silence.
‘Why don’t you say something?’ said Aroma. ‘I suppose I’ve upset you now. Well,
never mind! Tomorrow you can go out and buy the lot of them, just to spite me!’
‘I don’t see what answer I can give when you say things like that,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I
only said what a nice girl she was. I think she is exactly suited to live in a big, wealthy
household like ours. Much more so than some of the lumbering idiots who do live
here.’
‘She may not have that much good fortune,’ said Aroma; ‘but for all that she has
been very delicately brought up -- the apple of my aunt’s and uncle’s eye. She was
seventeen this holidays, and her trousseau is all ready for her to be married next
year.’
‘Hai!’
An involuntary expression of regret broke from him when he heard that the girl in red
was to be married. Already Aroma’s words had made him uneasy; but worse was to
follow.
‘I haven’t been able to see much of my cousins during these last few years,’ she
said with a sigh, ‘and now it looks as if they will all have left home when I do go back.’
There was obviously a good deal more that lay behind this remark. Startled, he threw
down the chestnut he was peeling and asked her:
‘How do you mean, “when you do go back”?’
‘Today I heard my mother discussing it with my elder brother. They want me to
hold out this one year more, then next year they will see about buying me out of
service.,
Bao-yu was becoming more and more alarmed.
‘Why should they want to buy you out of service?’
‘Well upon my word, that’s a funny question to ask!’ said Aroma. ‘I’m not one of
your house-born slaves, my family lives elsewhere. I’m the only member of my family
away from home. There’s no future for me here. Naturally I want to rejoin them.’
‘You can’t if I won’t let you,’ said Bao-yu.
‘I never heard of such a thing!’ said Aroma:

‘Even in palace hall
             Law is the lord of all.

A bond is a bond. When their term of service has ended, you have to let people go.
You can’t force them to stay in service for ever and ever -- especially a household like
yours.’
Bao-yu thought a bit. What she said seemed reasonable enough.
‘But suppose Grandmother won’t let you?’
‘Why shouldn’t she?’ said Aroma. ‘If I were a very excep?tional sort of person, it’s
quite possible that she and Her Ladyship might feel upset at the idea of losing me
and offer my family money to let me stay on. But as it is I’m only a very ordinary sort
of maid. There are any number much better than me. I started off with Her Old
Ladyship and served Miss Shi for a few years. Then I was transferred to you, and I’ve
already been quite a few years with you. They would think it quite natural that my
family should want to buy me out now. In fact, I wouldn’t be surprised if they let me
go as a kindness without even asking for the money. If you think they wouldn’t let me
go because I’ve served you so well, that’s just ridiculous. Serving you well is no more
nor less than what I’m supposed to do. It’s my job. There’s nothing remarkable about
that. There’ll be plenty of other good ones to take my place when I’m gone. I’m not
irreplaceable.’
Everything Aroma said pointed to the reasonableness of her going and the
unreasonableness of her staying. A kind of desperateness began to seize him.
‘That may be so,’ he said, ‘but if I’m absolutely determined to keep you, I’m sure
Grandmother would speak to your mother about it. If Grandmother had a talk with
your mother and offered her a really large sum of money, surely she wouldn’t
refuse?’
‘I’m sure my mother would never insist,’ said Aroma. ‘And I don’t only mean if you
spoke to her and gave her a lot of money. Even if you didn’t speak to her about it and
didn’t give her any money at all, but simply made up your mind to keep me here
against my will and say nothing, I’m sure she wouldn’t dare object. But your family
has never gone in for throwing its weight about like that in the past, and I don’t
believe it is going to start doing so now. It would be different if I were just an object
you’d taken a fancy to and they could get it for you without any danger of upsetting
the owner by simply offering him ten times the price. But I’m not an object. If you
were to keep me here without rhyme or reason against my will, you’d not only be
doing yourselves no good, you’d be breaking up someone else’s family; and that’s
something I’m quite sure Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship would never be willing
to do.’
For some time Bao-yu reflected in silence. At last he spoke:
‘The long and short of all this is that you are definitely going, is that right?’
‘Definitely.’
‘Who would have believed that so sweet a person could be so faithless and
unfeeling?’ he thought to himself. But all he said was:
‘If I had known all along that in the end you would go away and leave me on my
own, I should never have let you work for me in the first place.’
And with those words he took himself off to bed in a thoroughly bad humour and
composed himself for sleep.
Now Aroma’s mother and elder brother had spoken earlier that day about their
intention of buying her out of service, but Aroma had at once stated that she would
never go back home as long as she lived.
‘When you sold me in the first place,’ she said, ‘it was because you had nothing to
eat and I was the only thing you had left in the house which was worth a bit of
money. I couldn’t have refused to go and watched my own mother and father starve.
But now, fortunately, I’ve got a good situation—one in which I’m not beaten and
sworn at all day long and where I’m fed and clothed as well as the masters
themselves—and the rest of you, inspire of losing Father, have managed to get in the
clear again and are as well off now as you’ve ever been. If you were still hard up and
wanted to buy me out so that you could raise a bit of money by reselling me, there
would be some point in it. But you’re not. What do you want to buy me out for? Why
don’t you just pretend that I’m dead, then you won’t need to think about buying me
out any mote?’
And after that she had had a little cry.
Seeing her so adamant, her mother and brother had natur?ally resigned themselves
to her continuing in service. They did so the more readily as Aroma’s contract was, in
point of fact, for life. In seeking to redeem her they would have had to rely on the
customary generosity of the Jia’s, who, as soon as they were approached on the
subject, would in all probability restore not only the person of Aroma but also the
body-price offered for her, but who were certainly not under any obliga?tion to do
so.
Another consideration which predisposed them to let her stay was the well-known
fact— already mentioned by Aroma—that the Jia household did not ill-treat its
servants and relied more on kindness than coercion in its dealings with them. Indeed,
the ‘inside maids’—those who, like Aroma, were m personal attendance on members
of the family (and this was true of all of them, no matter in whose apartment they
were employed) were the crême de la crême of the household staff and were even
regarded as a cut above the free daughters of poorer households outside.
Later, when Bao-yu unexpectedly arrived on the scene and they saw how it was
between him and Aroma, the reason for her reluctance to leave service at once
became apparent. It was a factor they had not foreseen; but now they recognized it,
it is a great weight off their minds, and it was not without feel?ings of relief that they
abandoned all further thought of attempting to purchase her freedom.
But to return to our story.
Since early youth Aroma had always been aware that Bao-yu’s character was peculiar.
His naughtiness and intract?ability exceeded those of normal boys, and in addition
he had a number of extraordinary eccentricities of his own which she could scarcely
even have put a name to. Recently he had taken advantage of the comparative
immunity from parental control, afforded him by the all-encompassing protection of
his doting grandmother, to become even more wild and self-indulgent and even
more confirmed in his aversion to serious pursuits than in previous years, and all her
attempts to remonstrate with him met with the same obstinate unwilling?ness to
hear. Today’s talk about buying her out of service turned out to be providential. By
employing only a minimum of deceit, she could use it as a means of ascertaining his
real feelings towards her and of humbling his spirit a little, so that he might be in a
suitably chastened frame of mind for the lecture with which she was preparing to
admonish him. She judged from his going off silently to bed that he was shaken and a
little unsure of himself. Evidently she had succeeded in the first part of her plan.
Aroma had not really wanted the chestnuts. She had pre?tended to do so because
she was afraid that the matter of the koumiss might blow up into an incident like the
earlier one in?volving Snowpink and the tea. By pretending to want chest?nuts she
had deflected him from pursuing it further. She now told the younger maids to take
them away and eat them themselves, while she went over to rouse up Bao-yu. The
face that he lifted from the pillow was wet with tears.
‘Now what do you want to go upsetting yourself like that for?’ she said with a smile.
‘If you really want me to stay, of course I won’t go.’
Bao-yu at once brightened up.
‘Tell me!’ he said. ‘Tell me what I must do to prove to you how much I want you to
stay, since nothing I say myself seems any good!’
‘I know we’re both fond of each other,’ said Aroma. ‘That doesn’t need any proving.
But if you want to be sure of my staying here, it mustn’t only be because of that.
There are three other things I want to talk to you about. If you will promise to obey
me in all of them, I shall know that you really and truly want me to stay; then nothing
- not even a knife at my throat - will ever make me leave you!’
‘Tell me what they are!’ he said impetuously. ‘I promise to obey you. Dearest
Aroma! Sweetest Aroma! Never mind two or three: I would promise if it were two or
three hundred! All I ask is that you shouldn’t leave me. If the day ever comes when
nothing remains of me but floating particles of ash - no, not ash. Ash has form and
substance and perhaps consciousness too. Say smoke. A puff of thin smoke dissolved
upon the wind. When that is all that remains of me, and you can no longer fuss over
me because there is nothing left to fuss over, and I can no longer pay attention to you
because there is nothing left to pay attention with - when that time comes, you may
go or stay as you please!’
‘My dear young gentleman,’ said Aroma exasperatedly, dapping her hand over his
mouth to prevent him saying any more, ‘it’s precisely this way of carrying on that I
was going to talk to you about, and here you go, ranting away worse than ever!’
‘Right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Right. I promise never to talk that way again.’
‘That was the first thing I wanted you to reform.’
‘I’ve reformed already,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If I ever talk that way again, you can pinch my
lips! Then what?’
‘The second thing is this,’ said Aroma. ‘I don’t care whether you really like studying
or not, but even if you don’t, I’d like you at least to pretend that you do when you’re
with the Master or any other gentlemen, and not always be making sarcastic remarks
about it. If you could only put on an appear?ance of liking it, he would have less
cause to be angry with you, and could even take a bit of pride in you when he was
talk?ing to his friends. Look at it from his point of view. Every generation of your
family up to now have been scholars. Then suddenly you come along. Not only do
you hate studying --that’s already enough to make him feel angry and upset -- but on
top of that you have to be forever making rude remarks about it -- and not only
behind his back but even when he’s there. According to you anyone who studies and
tries to im?prove himself is a “career worm”. According to you the Illumi?nation of
Clear Virtue or whatever it’s called is the only genuine book ever written and all the
rest are forgeries. No wonder the Master gets so angry with you. No wonder he’s
every minute of the day wishing he could lay his hands on you and give you a
thrashing.’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘All right. I won’t say such things any more. In any case, these are all things I used to
say when I was younger and didn’t know any better. I don’t say things like that
nowadays. What else?’
‘You must leave off forever going on about people’s appearance and interfering
with their make-up—and you must give up that filthy habit of stealing people’s
lipstick and eating it on the sly. That’s most important!’
‘I’ll reform! I’ll reform! Is there anything else, now?’
‘Nothing else, really. Just to be a bit more careful about things in general and not
always letting yourself get carried away by your whims and fancies. But if you will
really keep your promise about these three things I’ve mentioned, I will promise
never to leave you - even if they send a bridal chair and eight strong bearers to carry
me away!’
‘Oh, come now! Isn’t that stretching it a bit?’ said Bao-yu with a laugh. ‘For eight
bearers and a handsome husband I bet you’d go!’
‘It wouldn’t interest me in the least,’ said Aroma haughtily. ‘“Kind sir, for such
blessing I am not willing.” Even if I did go, I should take no pleasure in it.’
Their dialogue was interrupted by Ripple, who just at that moment entered the
room.
‘It’s nearly midnight, you two. You ought to be in bed. Her Old Ladyship just now
sent one of the nannies round to ask about you and I told her you were asleep.’
Bao-yu asked for his watch and looked. The hand was pointing to half past eleven. He
washed and cleaned his teeth all over again, and taking off his outer clothes, settled
down once more to sleep.

*

When Aroma got up first thing next morning she felt heavy and unwell. Her head
ached, her eyelids were puffy and her whole body was afire. At first she dragged
herself round per?forming her usual tasks, but eventually she could hold out no
longer and had to lie down fully clothed on the kang. Bao-yu at once informed
Grandmother Jia, who called in a doctor. Having taken Aroma’s pulses, the doctor
informed them that she had ‘merely contracted a severe chill and would be all right
after taking a few doses of medicine to relieve the congestion,’ and left after writing a
prescription. Bao-yu sent out for the materials prescribed, and when they had been
duly boiled up and the first draught taken, made her cover herself with a quilt to
bring on a perspiration. Then he went off to see Dai-yu.
Dai-yu was at that moment taking a midday nap. Her maids had all gone off about
their own affairs. Not a sound could be heard from the inside room As Bao-yu lifted
the embroidered door-curtain and entered, he could see her lying asleep inside and
hurried over to rouse her:
‘Sleeping after you’ve just eaten, coz? That’s bad! Wake up!’
His voice woke her. She opened her eyes and saw that it was Bao-yu.
‘Do go away and play for a bit! I’m so dreadfully tired. I didn’t get any sleep last
night and I haven’t been able to rest until now.’
‘Never mind how tired you are,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You’ll do yourself much more harm by
sleeping after a meal. I’ll’ stay and amuse you to keep you awake if you feel sleepy.’
‘I’m not sleepy, I’m tired. I want to rest for a bit. Can’t you go and amuse yourself
somewhere else for a few minutes and come back later?’
Bao-yu gave her another shake.
‘Where else can I go?’ he said. ‘I’m so bored with everyone else.’
‘Chee-ee-ee!’ Dai-yu exploded in a little laugh. ‘All right. I suppose now you are
here you may as well stay. You can sit very, very quietly over there and we will talk.’
‘I should prefer to lie down,’ said Bao-yu.
‘All right, lie down then!’
‘There isn’t a pillow. We shall have to share yours.’
‘Don’t be ridiculous!’ said Dai-yu. ‘Look at all those pillows in the next room. Why
don’t you get yourself one of them?’
Bao-yu went into the outer room for a look but came back empty-handed.
‘I don’t want any of them,’ he said genially. ‘How do I know some dirty old woman
hasn’t been sleeping on them?’
Dai-yu opened her eyes very wide.
‘You really are the bane of my life!’ she said. ‘Here, take this!’ She pushed the
pillow she had been lying on towards him and got up to fetch another one of her
own to replace it with. The two of them then reclined, facing each other, at opposite
ends of the bed.
Glancing up from her recumbent position, Dai-yu noticed that there was a blood-spot
about the size of a small button on Bao-yu’s left cheek. She bent over him to examine
it more closely and touched it lightly with her finger.
‘Whose nails was it this time?’
Bao-yu lay back to avoid her scrutiny and laughed.
‘It isn’t a scratch. I’ve just been helping them make rouge. A little of it must have
splashed on to my face.’ He rum?maged for a handkerchief to wipe it off with.
Dai-yu wiped it off with her own, clicking her tongue censoriously as she did so.
‘So you’re up to those tricks again? You might at least refrain from advertising the
fact! Even if Uncle doesn’t see you himself, someone else might who thought it an
amusing story to go around gossiping about. He could easily get to hear about it in
that way, and that would make it unpleasant for all of us.’
But her words were lost on Bao-yu. He was preoccupied with a subtle fragrance
which seemed to emanate from Dai-?yu’s sleeve - a fragrance that intoxicated the
senses and caused one to feel rather limp. He seized hold of the sleeve and
demanded to know what perfume she was wearing.
‘Perfume? At this season?’ said Dai-yu with a laugh. ‘I’m not wearing any. “In the
cold winter none smells sweet”!’
‘Well, where does it come from, then?’
‘I don’t know myself where it comes from,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I suppose it might have
come from the wardrobe.’
Bao-yu shook his head.
‘I doubt it. It’s a very unusual scent. Not the kind you would get from a scent-cake
or a perfume-ball or sachet.’
‘I hope you don’t imagine it’s some exotic perfume given me by the Immortals of
the Isles. Even if I had the recipe, I have no kind elder brother to get together all
those flowers and stamens and things and make it up for me. I have got only the
ordinary, vulgar sorts of perfume!’
‘Whatever I say, you are always dragging in things like that,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Very well,
You will have to be taught a lesson. From now on, no mercy!’
Half rising, he pretended to spit on his hands, then stretch?ing them out before him,
began to waggle his fingers up and down in the region of her ribs and armpits. Dai-yu
had always been the most ticklish of mortals, and the mere sight of his waggling
fingers sent her off into shrieks of laughter which soon ended in breathlessness:
‘Oh! Oh! Bao-yu! No! Stop! I’ll be angry!’
‘Will you say things like that any more?’
‘No,’ said Dai-yu, laughing weakly, ‘I promise.’
She proceeded to pat her hair into place, smilingly com?placently:
‘So I’ve got an unusual fragrance, have I? Have you got a warm fragrance?’
For the moment Bao-yu was puzzled:
‘Warm fragrance?’
Dai-yu shook her head pityingly.
‘Don’t be so dense! You have your jade. Somebody has a gold thing to match.
Somebody has Cold Fragrance, ergo you must have Warm Fragrance to go with it!’
‘I’ve only just let you off,’ said Bao-yu, ‘and here you go again, worse than ever!’
Once more he stretched out the threatening fingers and Dai-yu again began to shriek.
‘No! Bao-yu! Please! I promise!’
‘All right, I forgive you. But you must let me smell your sleeve.’
He wrapped the free end of that garment over his face and abandoned himself to
long and prodigious sniffs.
Dai-yu jerked away her arm.
‘I really think you ought to go.’
‘Couldn’t go if I wanted to. Let’s lie down very quietly and genteelly and have a
conversation.’ And he stretched himself out again.
Dai-yu lay down too, and covered her face with a handker?chief.
He tried to arouse her interest with desultory chat—talking for the sake of talking.
Dai-yu took no notice. He tried asking questions. How old was she when she first
came to the Capital? What had the scenery been like on the journey? What places of
historical interest were there in Yangchow? What were its inhabitants like? What
were its local customs? Dai-yu made no reply. Still concerned that she might fail
asleep and injure her health, he tried a ruse.
‘Why, yes!’ he said, as if suddenly remembering something. ‘There’s a famous story
that took place near Yangchow. I wonder if you know about it.’
This was delivered with so straight a face and in so serious a tone of voice that Dai-yu
was quite taken in.
‘Oh? What?’
Mastering a strong inclination to laugh, he began to extemporize with whatever
came into his head.
‘Near the city of Yangchow there is a mountain called Mt Yu-dai, in the side of
which is a cavern called the Cave of Lin.’
‘That’s false, for a start,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’ve never heard of a mountain of that name.’
‘There are a great many mountains in this world,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You could hardly be
expected to know all of them. Leave your criticisms until I have finished my story.’
‘Carry on,’ said Dai-yu.
‘Now in the Cave of Lin there lived a tribe of magic mice, and one year, on the
seventh day of the last month, the Oldest Mouse climbed up on to his throne and sat
in council with the rest of the tribe.
‘“Tomorrow is Nibbansday,” he said, “and everywhere in the world of men they will
be cooking frumenty. Since our cave is at present short of dry provender, we should
take this opportunity of replenishing our stores by raiding theirs.” He took a
ceremonial arrow from the receptacle in front of him and handing it to an able
younger mouse, instructed him to carry out a reconnaissance. In due course the Able
Younger Mouse came back and reported that, though he had looked positively
everywhere, there were nowhere more plentiful stores to be found than in the
temple at the foot of the mountain.
“‘How many kinds of grain have they got there, and how many sorts of dried
fruits?” the Oldest Mouse asked him.
‘“There is a whole granary full of rice and beans,” replied the Able Younger Mouse,
“but only five kinds of dried fruits:
the first,       red dates
the second,       chestnut
the third,        peanuts
the fourth,       caltrops
the fifth,         sweet potatoes
‘The Oldest Mouse was highly delighted, and picked up another arrow, he said,
“Who will go to steal rice?”
‘A mouse at once took the arrow and went off to steal rice.’
“Who will go to steal beans?” he asked, picking up another arrow.
‘Another mouse took the arrow and went off to steal beans.’ One by one they
departed on their missions until only the sweet potatoes had still to be arranged for.
‘The Oldest Mouse took up another arrow.’
‘“Who will go to steal sweet potatoes?”
‘A little puny, weak mouse replied,
‘ “I will!”

‘Seeing how young and puny he was, the Oldest Mouse and the other members of
the mousey tribe feared that he would be too lacking in training and experience and
too timid and weak to carry out the task, and refused to let him go. But the little
mouse said,
“‘Although I am young in years and weak in body, I am eloquent and resourceful
and possess unlimited magic powers. I can guarantee to carry out this mission even
more ex?peditiously than the rest.”
“‘How will you do that?” asked the other mice.
“‘I shan’t rush at the job head-on like the others,” said the little mouse. “By just
giving my body a couple of shakes I shall change myself into a sweet potato; I shall
roll myself into the pile of sweet potatoes without anyone seeing me; then --very,
very gently I shall roll the sweet potatoes away, one by one, until there aren’t any
more left. Isn’t that a more ex?peditious way of doing it than the crude and headlong
approach which the others have adopted?”
“That’s all very well,” said the other mice, “but what about this transformation
business? Let’s see you do it first!”
‘“Nothing easier!” said the little mouse with a confident smile. “Watch!”
‘He gave his body a couple of shakes.
‘“Hey presto!”
‘And at once he turned into the most exquisitely beautiful young lady.
‘The other mice all laughed.
‘“No, no, no, you’ve made a mistake! That’s not a sweet potato, that’s a young lady
you’ve turned into!”
‘The little mouse resumed his own shape and smiled at them pityingly.
‘“It is you who are mistaken. You have seen too little of the world to understand.
The vegetable tuber is not the only kind of sweet potato. The daughter of our
respected Salt Commis?sioner Lin is also a sweet potato. She is the sweetest sweet
potato of them all.”’
Dai-yu got up on her knees and, crawling over, planted herself on top of Bao-yu.
‘I’ll teach you to make fun of me, you hateful creature! I’ll teach you!’
She seized his lips between thumb and finger and began to pinch and shake them.
‘Help!’ cried Bao-yu. ‘Mercy! I won’t do it again! It was smelling your beautiful
perfume that put me in mind of the allusion.’
‘Allusion?’ said Dai-yu. ‘You vilify someone else and then call it an allusion?’
Just at that moment Bao-chai walked in.
‘Who’s this talking about allusions? I must hear this!’
Dai-yu invited her to sit down.
‘Look! Who else would you expect it to be? He says a lot of horrid things about me
and then tells me it’s an allusion!’
‘Oh,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Cousin Bao I’m not surprised, then. He is full of allusions. The
only trouble is that he tends to forget them at the very moment when they are most
needed. If he can remember allusions today, he ought to have been able to
remember that allusion about the plantain the other night. But no, it just wouldn’t
come, and though everyone else was dying of cold, he was perspiring! Yet now his
memory has come back again. Strange!’
‘Now praised be!’ said Dai-yu. ‘I have a nice, kind cousin to stick up for me. You’ve
met your match now,’ she said to Bao-yu. ‘Now you are going to get as good as you
give! Now we shall see you paid in your own coin!’
Their conversation was interrupted by a burst of angry shouting from the direction of
Bao-yu’s room.
The occasion of it will be discussed in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 20



Wang Xi-feng castigates a jealous attitude
with some forthright speaking
And Lin Dai-yu makes a not unattractive speech
impediment the subject of a jest



We have shown how Bao-yu was in Dai-yu’s room telling her the story of the magic
mice; how Bao-chai burst in on them and twitted Bao-yu with his failure to
remember the ‘green wax’ allusion on the night of the Lantern Festival; and how the
three of them sat teasing each other with good-humoured banter.
Bao-yu had been afraid that by sleeping after her meal Dai-yu would give herself
indigestion or suffer from insomnia through being insufficiently tired when she went
to bed at night, but Bao-chai’s arrival and the lively conversation that followed it
banished all Dai-yu’s desire to sleep and enabled him to lay aside his anxiety on her
behalf.
Just then a sudden commotion arose from the direction of Bao-yu’s room, and the
three of them stopped talking and turned their heads to listen. Dai-yu was the first to
speak:
‘That’s your Nannie quarrelling with Aroma,’ she said. ‘To think how that poor girl
goes out of her way to be nice to the old woman, yet still she manages to find fault
with her! She really must be getting senile.’
Bao-yu was for rushing over straight away, but Bao-chai restrained him:
‘Don’t go quarrelling with your Nannie, whatever you do! She’s only a silly old
woman. You have to indulge her a bit.’
‘Of course,’ said Bao-yu and ran off.
He found Nannie Li leaning on her stick in the middle of the room abusing Aroma.:
‘Ungrateful little baggage! After all I’ve done for you—and now when I come to call
on you, you lie back there on the kang like a young madam and haven’t even the
grace to look up and take notice of me! You and your airs and graces! All you ever
think about is how to win Bao-yu over to you. Thanks to you he won’t listen to me
any more. He only does what you say. To think that a cheap bit of goods like you that
they only paid a few taels of silver for should come along here and turn the whole
place upside down! The best thing they could do with you would be to marry you off
to one of the boys and send you packing. Then we’d see how you managed to play
the siren and lead young gentlemen astray!’
Aroma at first thought that Nannie Li’s anger arose solely on account of her failure to
get up and welcome her, and had started to excuse herself on that supposition:
‘I’m ill, Mrs Li. I’ve just been sweating. I didn’t see you because I had my head
under the clothes.’
But when the old woman proceeded to go on about leading young men astray and
marrying her off to a servant and what not, she felt wronged and humiliated, and in
spite of her efforts to restrain them, burst into tears of sheer helplessness.
Bao-yu had heard all this, and though too embarrassed to argue, could scarcely
refrain from saying a word or two in Aroma’s defence:
‘She’s ill. She’s having to take medicine,’ he said. ‘If you don’t believe me, ask any of
the maids.’
This made the old woman even angrier.
‘Oh yes! You stick up for the little hussies! You don’t care about me any more! And
which of them am I supposed to ask, pray? They will all take your side against me.
You are all under Aroma’s thumb, every one of you. I know what goes on here, don’t
think I don’t! Well, you can come along with me to see Her Old Ladyship and Her
Ladyship about this. Let them heat how you have cast me off—me that reared you at
my own breast—now that you don’t need my milk any more, and how you encourage
a pack of snotty-nosed little maidservants to amuse themselves at my expense!’
She was in tears herself by now, and wept as she cursed.
By this time Dai-yu and Bao-chai had also arrived on the scene and did their best to
calm her:
‘Come, Nannie! Be a bit more forbearing with them! Try to forget about it!’
Nannie Li turned towards this new audience and proceeded to pour out her troubles
in an interminable gabble in which tea and Snowpink and drinking koumiss mingled
incoherently.
Xi-feng happened to be in Grandmother Jia’s room totting up the day’s scores for the
final settlement when she heard this hubbub in the rear apartment. She identified it
immediately as Nannie Li on the rampage once more, taking out on Bao-yu’s
unfortunate maids some of the spleen occasioned by her recent gambling losses. At
once she hurried over, seized Nannie Li by the hand, and admonished her with
smiling briskness:
‘Now, Nannie, we mustn’t lose our tempers! This is the New Year holiday and Her
Old Ladyship has been enjoying herself all day. A person of your years ought to be
stopping other people from quarrelling, not upsetting Her Old Lady?ship by
quarrelling yourself. Surely you know better than that? If anyone has been
misbehaving, you have only to tell me and I’ll have them beaten for you. Now I’ve got
a nice hot pheasant stew in my room. You just come along with me and you shall
have some of that and a drink to go with it!’
She proceeded to haul her off the premises, addressing a few words over her
shoulder to her maid Felicity as she went:
‘Felicity, bring Nannie’s stick for her, there’s a good girl! And for goodness’ sake give
her a handkerchief to wipe her eyes with!’
Unable to hold her ground, the old Nannie was borne off in Xi-feng’s wake, muttering
plaintively as she went:
‘I wish I was dead, I really do! But I’d sooner forget myself and make a scene like I
have today and be shamed in front of you all than put up with the insolence of those
shameless little baggages!’
Watching this sudden exit, Bao-chai and Dai-yu laughed and clapped their hands:
‘How splendid! Just the sort of wind we needed to blow the old woman away!’
But Bao-yu shook his head and sighed:
‘I wonder what had really upset her. Obviously she only picked on Aroma because
she is weak and can’t defend herself. I wonder which of the girls had offended her to
make her so .
He was interrupted by Skybright:
‘Why should any of us want to upset her? Do you think we’re mad? And even if we
had offended her, we should be perfectly capable of owning up to it and not letting
someone else take the blame!’
Aroma grasped Bao-yu’s hand and wept:
‘Because I offended one old nurse, you have to go offending a whole roomful of
people. Don’t you think there’s been enough trouble already without dragging other
people into it?’
Seeing how ill she looked and realizing that distress of mind could only aggravate her
condition, Bao-yu stifled his indig?nation and did his best to comfort her so that she
might be able to settle down once more and continue sweating out the fever. Her
skin was burning to the touch. He decided to stay with her for a while, and lying
down beside her, spoke to her soothingly:
‘Just try to get better, now! Never mind all that other nonsense! It’s of no
importance.’
Aroma smiled bitterly.
‘If I had allowed myself to get upset about things like that, I shouldn’t have lasted in
this room for five minutes! Still, if we’re always going to have this sort of trouble, I
think in the long run I just shan’t be able to stand any more. You don’t seem to
realize. You offend people on my account and the next moment you’ve forgotten all
about it. But they haven’t. It’s all scored up against me; and as soon as something
goes a bit wrong, they come out with all these horrible things about me. It makes it
so unpleasant for all of us.’
She cried weakly as she said this, but presently checked herself for fear of upsetting
Bao-yu.
Soon the odd-job woman came in with the second infusion of Aroma’s medicine.
Bao-yu could see that she had started sweating again and told her not to get up,
holding the medicine for her himself and supporting her while she drank it. Then he
told one of the junior maids to make up a bed for her on the kang.
‘Whether you’re going to eat there or not,’ Aroma said to him, ‘you’d better go and
sit with Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship for a bit and play a while with the young
ladies before you come back here again. I shall be all right if I lie here quietly on my
own.’
Bao-yu thought he had better do as she said, and after wait?ing until she had taken
off her ornaments and was lying tucked up in bed, he went to the front apartment
and took his dinner with Grandmother Jia.
After dinner Grandmother Jia wanted to go on playing cards with some of the old
stewardesses. Bao-yu, still worrying about Aroma, returned to his own room, where
he found her sleeping fitfully. He thought of going to bed himself, but it was still too
early. Skybright, Mackerel, Ripple and Emerald had gone off in quest of livelier
entertainment, hoping to persuade Grandmother Jia’s maids, Faithful and Amber, to
loin them in a game. Only Musk was left in the outer room, playing Patience under
the lamp with a set of dominoes. Bao-yu smiled at her.
‘Why don’t you go off to loin the others?’
‘I haven’t got any money.’
‘There’s a great pile of money under the bed. Isn’t that enough for you to lose?’
‘If we all went off to play,’ said Musk, ‘who would look after this room? There’s her
sick inside. And lamps and stoves burning everywhere. The old women were
practically dead on their feet after waiting on you all day; I had to let them go and
rest. And the girls have been on duty all day, too. You could scarcely grudge them
some time off now for amusement.—Which leaves only me to look after the place.’
‘Another Aroma,’ thought Bao-yu to himself and gave her another smile.
‘I’ll sit here while you’re away. There’s nothing to worry about here if you’d like to
go.’
‘There’s even less excuse for going if you are here,’ said Musk. ‘Why can’t we both
sit here and talk?’
‘What can we do?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Just sitting here talking is going to be rather dull. I
know! You were saying this morning that your head was itchy. As you haven’t got
anything else to do now, I’ll comb it for you.’
‘All right,’ said Musk, and fetching her toilet-box with the mirror on top she
proceeded to take off her ornaments and shake her hair out. Bao-yu took a comb and
began to comb it for her. But he had not drawn it more than four or five times
through her hair, when Skybright came bursting in to get some more money. Seeing
the two of them together, she smiled sarcastically:
‘Fancy! Doing her hair already-- before you’ve even drunk the marriage-cup!’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘Come here! I’ll do yours for you too, if you like!’
‘I wouldn’t presume, thanks all the same!’
She took the money, and with a swish of the door-blind was gone.
Bao-yu was standing behind Musk as she sat looking at her?self in the mirror. Their
eyes met in the glass and they both laughed.
‘Of all the girls in this room she has the sharpest tongue,’ said Bao-yu.
Musk signalled to him agitatedly in the glass with her hand. Bao-yu took her meaning;
but it was too late. With another swish of the door-blind, Skybright had already
darted in again.
‘Oh! Sharp-tongued, am I? Perhaps you’d like to say a bit more on that subject?’
‘Get along with you!’ laughed Musk. ‘Don’t go starting any more arguments!’
‘And don’t you go sticking up for him!’ said Skybright gaily. ‘I know what you’re up
to, you two. You don’t deceive me with your goings-on. I’ll have something to say to
you about this when I get back later. Just wait until I’ve won some of my money
back!’
With that she darted off once more.
When Bao-yu had finished combing her hair, he asked Musk to help him get to
bed—very quietly, so as not to disturb Aroma.
And that ends our account of that day.

*

First thing next morning Aroma awoke to find that she had sweated heavily during
the night and that her body felt very much lighter; but she would take only a little
congee for breakfast in order not to tax her system too soon. Bao-yu saw that there
was no further cause for concern, and after his meal drifted off to Aunt Xue’s
apartment in search of amusement.
Now this was the prime of the year, when the schoolroom is closed for the New Year
holiday and the use of the needle is forbidden to maidenly fingers throughout the
whole of the Lucky Month, so that boys and girls alike are all agreeably un?employed,
and Bao-yu’s half-brother Jia Huan, on holiday like all the rest, had also drifted over
to Aunt Xue’s place in search of amusement. He found Bao-chai, Caltrop and Oriole
there playing a game of Racing Go, and after watching them for a bit, wanted to play
too.
Bao-chai had always behaved towards Jia Huan in exactly the same way as she did
towards Bao-yu and made no distinc?tions between them. Consequently, when he
asked to play, she at once made a place for him and invited him to join them on the
kang. They played for stakes of ten cash each a game. Jia Huan won the first game
and felt very pleased. But then, as luck would have it, he lost several times in a row
and began to get somewhat rattled.
It was now his turn to throw the dice. He needed seven to win, and if he threw
anything less than seven, the dice would go next to Oriole, who needed only three.
He hurled them from the pot with all his might. One of them rested at two. The other
continued rather erratically to roll about. ‘Ace! Ace! Ace!’ cried Oriole, clapping her
hands. ‘Six! Seven! Eight!’ shouted Jia Huan glaring at Oriole and commanding the
die to perform the impossible. But the perverse wanderer finally came to rest with
the ace uppermost, making a grand total of three. With the speed of desperation Jia
Huan reached out and snatched it up, claiming, as he did so, that it was a six.
‘It was an ace,’ said Oriole, ‘as plain as anything!’
Bao-chai could see that Jia Huan was rattled, and darting a sharp look at Oriole,
commanded her to yield.
‘You grow more unmannerly every day,’ she told her. ‘Surely you don’t think one of
the masters would cheat you? Come on! Put your money down!’
Oriole smarted with the injustice of this, but her mistress had ordered it, so she had
to pay up without arguing. She could not, however, forbear a few rebellious
mutterings:
‘Huh! One of the masters! Cheating a maid out of a few coppers! Even I should be
ashamed! Look how much money Bao-yu lost when he was playing with us the other
day, yet he didn’t mind. Even when some of the maids took all he had left, he only
laughed...’
She would have gone on, but Bao-chai checked her angrily. ‘How can I hope to
compete with Bao-yu?’ said Jia Huan, beginning to blubber. ‘You’re all afraid of him.
You all take his part against me because I’m only a concubine’s son.’
Bao-chai was shocked:
‘Please don’t say things like that, Cousin! You’ll make your?self ridiculous.’
Once more she rebuked Oriole.
Just at that moment Bao-yu walked in, and seeing the state that Jia Huan was in,
asked him what was the matter. But Jia Huan dared not say anything.
Bao-chai, familiar with the state of affairs, normal in other families, which places the
younger brother in fearful subjec?tion to the elder, assumed that Jia Huan was afraid
of Bao-yu. She was unaware that Bao-yu positively disliked anyone being afraid of
him. ‘We are both equally subject to our parents’ control,’ he would say of himself
and Jia Huan. ‘Why should I create a greater distance between us by trying to control
him myself - especially when I am the wife’s son and he is the concubine’s? People
already talk behind our backs, even when I do nothing. It would be ten times worse if
I were to start bossing him about.’
But’ there was another, zanier, notion which contributed to this attitude. Let us try to
explain it. Bao-yu had from early youth grown up among girls. There were his sisters
Yuan?-chun and Tan-chun, his cousins of the same surname Ying?-chun and Xi-chun,
and his distaff-cousins Shi Xiang-yun, Lin Dai-yu and Xue Bao-chai. As a result of this
upbringing, he had come to the conclusion that the pure essence of human?ity was
all concentrated in the female of the species and that males were its mere dregs and
off-scourings. To him, there?fore, all members of his own sex without distinction
were brutes who might just as well not have existed. Only in the case of his father,
uncles and brother, where rudeness and dis?obedience were expressly forbidden by
the teachings of Confucius, did he make an exception—and even then the allowances
he made in respect of the fraternal bond were extremely perfunctory. It certainly
never occurred to him that his own maleness placed him under any obligation to set
an example to the younger males in his clan. The latter—Jia Huan
included—reciprocated with a healthy disrespect only slightly tempered by their fear
of his doting grandmother.
But Bao-chai was ignorant of ail this; and fearing that Bao-yu might embarrass them
all by delivering a big brother’s telling-off, she hastened to Jia Huan’s defence.
‘What are you crying about in the middle of the New Year holidays?’ said Bao-yu to
Jia Huan, ignoring Bao-chai’s excuses. ‘If you don’t like it here, why don’t you go
somewhere else? I think your brains must have been addled by too much study. Can’t
you see that if there is something you don’t like, there must be something else you
do like, and that all you’ve got to do is leave the one and go after the other? Not
hang on to it and cry. Crying won’t make it any better. You came here to enjoy
yourself, didn’t you? And now you’re here you re miserable, right? Then the thing to
do is to go somewhere else, isn’t it?’
In the face of such an argument, Jia Huan could not very well remain
When he got back to his own apartment, his real mother, ‘Aunt’ Zhao (Lady Wang
was his mother only in name) observed the dejected state he was in.
‘Who’s been making a doormat of you this time?’ she asked him, and, obtaining no
immediate reply, asked again.
‘I’ve just been playing at Bao-chai’s. Oriole cheated me and Bao-yu turned me out.’
Aunt Zhao spat contemptuously:
‘Nasty little brat! That’s what comes of getting above yourself. Who asked you to go
playing with that lot? You could have gone anywhere else to play. Asking for trouble!’
Just at that moment Xi-feng happened to be passing by outside, and hearing what
she said, shouted back at her through the window:
‘What sort of language is that to be using in the middle of the New Year holiday?
He’s only a child. He hasn’t done any?thing terrible. What do you want to go carrying
on at him like that for? No matter where he’s been, Sir Zheng and Lady Wang are
quite capable of looking after him themselves. There’s no cause for you to go biting
his head off! After all, he is one of the masters. If he’s misbehaved himself, you
should leave the telling-off to those whose job it is. It’s no business of yours. Huan!
Come out here! Come and play with me!’
Jia Huan had always been afraid of Xi-feng - more even than he was of Lady
Wang—and hearing her call him, came running out immediately. Aunt Zhao dared
not say a word.
‘You’re a poor-spirited creature!’ Xi-feng said to him. ‘How many times have I told
you that you can eat and drink and play with any of the boys and girls you like? But
instead of doing as I say, you hang about with these other people and let them warp
your mind for you and fill it up with mischief. You’ve no self-respect, that’s your
trouble. Can’t keep away from the gutter. You insist on making yourself disagreeable
and then you complain that people are prejudiced against you! Fancy making a fuss
like that about losing a few coppers! How much did you lose?’
‘One or two hundred,’ Jia Huan muttered abjectly.
‘All this fuss about one or two hundred cash! And you one of the masters!’ She
turned to Felicity. ‘Go and get a string of cash for him, Felicity, and take him round to
the back where Miss Ying and the girls are playing! And if I have anymore of this
nonsense from you in future, young man,’ she went on to Jia Huan, ‘I’ll first give you
a good hiding myself and then send someone to tell the school about you and see if
they can knock a bit of sense into you! It sets your Cousin Lan’s teeth on edge to see
you so wanting in self-respect. He’d have dis?-embowelled you by now I shouldn’t
wonder, if I hadn’t kept his hands off you! Now be off with you!’
‘Yes,’ said Jia Huan meekly and went off with Felicity. When he had got his money,
he took himself off to play with Ying-chun and the girls.
And there we must leave him.

*

While Bao-yu was enjoying himself with Bao-chai, a servant announced that Miss Shi
had arrived, and he hurriedly got up to go.
‘Wait!’ said Bao-chai. ‘Let’s go and see her together!’ She got down from the kang
as she said this, and accom?panied him round to Grandmother Jia’s apartment. Shi
Xiang-yun was already there, laughing and chattering away nineteen to the dozen,
but rose to greet them as they entered. Dai-yu was there too.
‘Where have you been?’ she asked Bao-yu.
‘Bao-chai’s.’
‘I see’ (very frostily). ‘I thought something must have been detaining you.
Otherwise you would have come flying here long since.’
‘Is one only allowed to play with you,’ said Bao-yu, ‘and keep you amused? I just
happened to be visiting her. Why should you start making remarks like that?’
‘How thoroughly disagreeable you are!’ said Dai-yu. ‘What do I care whether you
go to see her or not? And I’m sure I never asked to be kept amused. From now on
you can ignore me completely, as far as I’m concerned.’
With that she went back to her own room in a temper.
Bao-yu came running after.
‘What on earth are you upset about this time? Even if I’ve said anything wrong, you
ought, out of simple courtesy, to sit and talk with the others for a bit!’
‘Are you telling me how to behave?’
‘Of course not. It’s just that you destroy your health by carrying on in this way.’
‘That’s my affair. If I choose to die, I don’t see that it’s any concern of yours.’
‘Oh, really, really! Here we are in the middle of the New Year holiday, and you have
to start talking about death!’
‘I don’t care. I’ll talk about death if I like. Death! Death! Death! I’m going to die this
minute. If you’re so afraid of death, I wish you long life. A hundred years, will that
satisfy you?’
‘Do you think I’m afraid of dying when all you will do is quarrel? I wish I were dead.
It would be a relief.’
‘Exactly! ‘said Dai-yu. ‘if I were to die, it would be a relief from all this quarrelling!’
‘I said if I were to die,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Don’t twist my words. It isn’t fair.’
Just then Bao-chai came hurrying in.
‘Cousin Shi’s waiting for you!’
She took hold of Bao-yu’s hand and pulled him after her, to the great mortification of
Dai-yu, who sat with her face to the window and shed tears bf pure rage.
After about as long as it would take to drink two cups of tea, Bao-yu came back again.
During his absence Dai-yu’s sobs seemed to have redoubled in intensity. Seeing the
state she was in he realized that it would need careful handling and began turning
over in his mind all kinds of soft and soothing things to coax her with. But before he
could get his mouth open, she had anticipated him:
‘What have you come for this time? Why can’t you just leave me here to die in
peace? After all, you’ve got a new play?mate now - one who can read and write and
compose and laugh and talk to you much better than I can. Oh yes, and drag you off
to be amused if there’s any danger of your getting upset! I really can’t imagine what
you have come back here for!’
‘“Old friends are best friends and close kin are kindest,”’said Bao-yu, coming over
to where she sat and speaking very quietly. ‘You’re too intelligent not to know that.
Even a simpleton like me knows that much! Take kinship first: you are my cousin on
Father’s side; Cousin Bao is only a mother-cousin. That makes you much the closer
kin. And as for length of acquaintance: it was you who came here first. You and I have
practically grown up together—eaten at the same table, even slept in the same bed.
Compared with you she’s practi?cally a new arrival. Why should I ever be any less
dose to you because of her?’
‘Whatever do you take me for? Do you think I want you to be any less close to her
because of me? It’s the way I feel that makes me the way I am.’
‘And it’s the way I feel,’ said Bao-yu, ‘that makes me the way I am! Do you mean to
tell me that you know your own feelings about me but still don’t know what my
feelings are about you?’
Dai-yu lowered her head and made no reply. After a pause she said:
‘You complain that whatever you do people are always getting angry with you. You
don’t seem to realize how much you provoke them by what you do. Take today, for
instance. It’s obviously colder today than it was yesterday. Then why of all days
should you choose today to leave your blue cape off?’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘I didn’t. I was wearing it this morning the same as usual; but when you started
quarrelling just now, I got into such a sweat that I had to take it off.’
‘Next thing you’ll be catching a cold,’ said Dai-yu with a sigh, ‘and then Heaven
knows what grumblings and scoldings there will be!’
Just then Xiang-yun burst in on them and reproved them smilingly for abandoning
her:
‘Couthin Bao, Couthin Lin: you can thee each other every day. It’th not often I get a
chanthe to come here; yet now I have come, you both ignore me!’
Dai-yu burst out laughing:
‘Lisping doesn’t seem to make you any less talkative! Listen to you: “Couthin!”
“Couthin!” Presently, when you’re play?ing Racing Go, you’ll be all “thicktheth” and
“theventh”!’
‘You’d better not imitate her,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’ll get to be a habit. You’ll be lisping
yourself before you know where you are.’
‘How you do pick on one!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Always find?ing fault. Even if you are tho
perfect yourthelf, I don’t thee why you have to go making fun of everyone elthe. But I
can show you thomeone you won’t dare to find fault with. I shall certainly think you a
wonder if you do.’
‘Who’s that?’ said Dai-yu
‘If you can find any shortcomings in Cousin Bao-chai’, said Xiang-yun, ‘you must be
very good indeed.’
‘Oh her,’ said Dai-yu coldly. ‘I wondered whom you could mean. I should never dare
to find fault with her.’
But before she could say any more, Bao-yu cut in and hurriedly changed the subject.
‘I shall never be a match for you as long as I live,’ Xiang?-yun said to Dai-yu with a
disarming smile. ‘All I can thay ith that I hope you marry a lithping huthband, tho that
you have “ithee-withee” “ithee-withee” in your earth every minute of the day. Ah,
Holy Name! I think I can thee that blethed day already before my eyeth!’
Bao-yu could not help laughing; but Xiang-yun had already turned and fled.
If you wish to know the conclusion of this scene, you must read the following
chapter.
