CHAPTER 61

Bao-yu owns up to a crime he
did not commit
And Patience bends authority in order that
the innocent may be spared



Cook Liu was trying to get back into the Garden, but the bantering page-boy delayed
her.
‘You don’t live in this direction. Naughty old Auntie! What have you been up to?’
“‘Auntie” is it?’ said Cook Liu, laughing. ‘Cheeky little monkey! If your “auntie” has
got herself a fancy man, that means you have a new uncle, so what are you worrying
about? You open that gate quickly, my lad, and let me in, or I’ll take hold of you by
that little po-cover of yours and pull your hair out!’
‘If I let you in, promise you’ll pinch a few apricots for me,’ said the boy, ‘to make up
for having kept me waiting so long. Mind you don’t forget, now, or next time you
want to nip out in the middle of the night for a bottle of wine or some oil, I’ll not
open for you. I’ll just let you stand there shouting and not even answer you.’
‘You must be mad!’ said the cook. ‘We can’t do that sort of thing any more now.
Nowadays it’s all divided up among the garden-women; and there isn’t one of them,
either, that wouldn’t just as soon scratch your eyes out as look at you. You only have
to walk under one of the fruit-trees and they’re watching you like hawks. Fat chance I
should have of picking any of the fruit for you! Only yester?day I was walking
underneath a plum-tree and raised my hand to drive a bee away that was buzzing in
front of my face. One of your old aunties happened to see me, but as she was quite a
long way off, she couldn’t quite make out what I was doing. She thought I was picking
the plums. Oh, you should have heard her shout! “Don’t take them! We haven’t
offered the first-fruits yet. No one must have any of those plums until Their Ladyships
have got back and made the offerings. You’ll get your share in time.” I suppose she
thought I had a craving and couldn’t wait! I’m afraid I wasn’t very polite. I gave her a
piece of my mind. You ask one of your old aunties if you want some fruit, my boy, it’s
no good asking me. You asking me for fruit is like the granary rat asking the crow
for corn: Have asking Have-not!’
‘Oh dear, oh dear!’ said the boy sarcastically. ‘If you can’t get me any, you can’t;
there’s no need to go on about it so. I suppose you think you won’t be needing my
services any more; but you will. When your Fivey gets her job inside, you’re going to
need my services more than ever.’
‘Whatever rubbish will the boy come out with next?’ said the cook. ‘What job are
you talking about?’
‘It’s no good pretending,’ the boy crowed. ‘I know. You needn’t think you’re the
only one with contacts inside. I’ve got my contacts too. I may be all the time working
here outside, but I’ve got two girl cousins inside who keep me informed. There’s
nothing much going on inside there that I don’t know about.’
At that point in their exchange they were interrupted by an old woman’s voice from
within:
‘Come on, you little monkey, you let Mrs Liu in this minute! If she doesn’t come in
directly, they won’t get their dinners in time.’
‘Don’t worry, I’m coming!’
Cook Liu brushed past the boy and, pushing the gate open for herself, went hurrying
back to the kitchen. Several of her assistants were waiting there already. They had
been standing about doing nothing, none of them having dared to take the initiative
without her.
‘Where’s Fivey gone?’ she asked them.
‘She just this minute went off to look for her cousins in the tea-room,’ they said.
Cook Liu put the packet of Lycoperdon Snow somewhere to give to her daughter later
and began making up the food-boxes for the different apartments. While she was
engaged in this work, Ying-chun’s little maid Lotus arrived with a message from
Chess.
‘Chess says for dinner tonight she wants a bowl of egg-custard, lightly done.’
‘That’s a bit of a luxury just now,’ said the cook. ‘I don’t know why it is, but for some
reason hen’s eggs seem to be in very short supply this year. Ten cash each they’re
charging for them at the moment, and even then you’re lucky if you can find any. The
other day, when they were making up a present for one of Her Ladyship’s relations
that had just had a baby, there were four or five of our buyers out scouring the
markets for eggs. They had no end of a job getting together two thousand. So you
can imagine what it must be like for me. Tell her to ask for eggs some other time.’
‘The other day when she wanted bean-curd, you gave me some that was rancid,’
said Lotus, ‘and I got a telling-off for it. Now she wants eggs and you say you haven’t
got any. I bet I could find some here if I looked.’
She stepped over to the food-container and took the lid off. Among the other things
revealed was a little cache of some ten or a dozen eggs.
‘There you are, what are they then?’ she said. ‘Aren’t you terrible? The food we eat
is all paid for, I don’t know why you’re so grudging with it. It isn’t as if you’d laid the
eggs yourself!’
‘I’ll give you laying eggs, my girl! If anyone lays eggs around here, it’ll be your
mother! Those are the only eggs I’ve got left and I’ve been saving them up to use as
garnishing on other dishes. Even then I’ll only use them if the young mistresses ask
for them specially. I need to have a few eggs by me in case of emergency. What am I
going to do if one of the mistresses asks for some eggs and you lot have already
eaten them all? “What?” she’ll say. “No eggs? Not even any eggs?” You people lead
such soft, sheltered lives. All you’ve got to do is stretch your hands out for
washing-water and your mouths open for food. You think eggs are the commonest
things in the world, you don’t realize there can be such things as shortages. Never
mind eggs, the day may yet come when there’s not even a corn-stalk to be had. My
advice to you girls is to try and make do with what you’re given. After all, you get the
best quality white rice, and chicken and duck to eat every day. It’s too much
pampering that causes this passion for variety: eggs one day, bean-curd the next,
fried pickled turnips in gluten batter ... It’s all very well saying you want something
different, but I’m afraid it won’t do. If each lot wants something different, that’s ten
different dishes I’ve got to prepare. I might just as well stop catering for the young
mistresses altogether and do nothing but cook for you girls!’
Lotus went red and shouted angrily back at her.
‘It’s not true that we’re always asking for something different. This rigmarole of
yours is quite uncalled for. Anyway, it’s your job to give us what we want. If that isn’t
your job, I’d like to know what is. You were obliging enough to Swallow the other day,
when she came to say that Skybright wanted a dish of artemisia shoots. “With pork
or with chicken?” you asked her. And when Swallow said Skybright didn’t eat meat,
she’d have it with wheat gluten, only not too much oil, “Oh,” you said, “how stupid of
me! I’d quite forgotten she was a vegetarian.” You scurried off to wash your hands
first before you cooked it, and when you’d cooked it, you carried it all the way there
for her your?self, just like a little dog that runs wagging its tall to its master. Why you
should pick on me to make an example of in front of all these people, I do not know.’
‘Holy name!’ said Cook Liu. ‘These people here will be my witness. Whenever
anyone from one of the other apartments, whether mistress or maid, asks me for a
special order -and I’m not just talking about that occasion you mentioned, I’m talking
about ever since this kitchen here first started -they invariably offer me something to
cover the extra cost. Whether I have to buy anything extra or not, it’s a nice gesture
and I appreciate it. Some people think that as I only have the young ladies to cater for,
I must make a lot out of it; but if anyone took the trouble to sit down and work it out,
they’d get a shock. Between forty and fifty people I have to cater for, counting both
mistresses and maids. And do you know what my daily allowance is? Two chickens,
two ducks, ten catties of pork and a thousand cash worth of vegetables. You try
managing on that! I can barely make it stretch to two meals a day provided everyone
sticks to the regu?lar menu; but if I’m going to have one person ordering one thing
and one person ordering another, turning down the food I’ve bought for them and
expecting me to buy other materials to make up their orders, my allowance simply
won’t stretch to it. If that’s the way you want it, you’ll just have to ask Her Ladyship
to give you all bigger allowances; then we can do what they do in the main kitchen
for Her Old Ladyship’s meals: have a blackboard with the names of all the dishes
under the sun chalked up on it and work through them one by one, having a different
dish every day. Then you could settle with me for what you’d eaten at the end of
each month. A week or two ago Miss Tan and Miss Bao suddenly thought they’d
fancy a dish of salted bean-sprouts and Miss Tan sent one of the girls over with five
hundred cash to ask me if I would prepare it for them. I laughed. “They’d never eat
five hundred cash worth,” I said, “not if they had bellies like the Laughing Buddha.
Twenty or thirty cash would be ample.” I sent the money back to her, but she
wouldn’t take it - said I should keep it to buy myself a drink with. “Now that the
kitchen’s inside,” she said, “I expect you often have people coming round and asking
you for favours.” She said, “I know it’s hard for you to refuse them, but even salt and
soy sauce cost something, and we don’t want you to end up out of pocket. Let’s call
this a payment to make up for some of the extras that other people have had out of
you.” Now there’s a kind, understanding young lady! I praise the Lord in my heart for
a young lady like that! Too bad that Mrs Zhao got to hear about it. She was furious, of
course: thought I was doing far too well out of it. And sure enough she sent one of
her little maids round less than ten days later asking for this and asking for that. I
couldn’t help laughing. You’re just the same. I suppose you’ve taken a leaf out of her
book. Well, it’s no good. My allowance just won’t stretch to it.’
Just then another messenger arrived from Chess to find out what had become of
Lotus.
‘What’s the matter?’ the messenger asked her. ‘Have you taken root or something?
Why don’t you come back?’
Lotus flounced off angrily after the messenger. The report that she gave when she
got back was so highly embellished that Chess could hardly fail to be incensed by it.
She was unable to do anything about it for the time being, because she was in the
middle of serving Ying-chun her dinner; but as soon as Ying-chun’s meal was over,
she hurried off to the kitchen, taking several of the junior maids with her.
She arrived as the kitchen staff were having their own dinner. The women, to whom
it was obvious that some kind of mischief was imminent, rose to their feet with
nervous smiles on their faces and invited her to sit with them. Ignor?ing the women,
she issued a brusque command to her minions:
‘Right! Boxes, bins, cupboards - wherever the food’s kept - throw it all out! Better
the dogs eat it than these swindlers have it all!’
The young maids, needing no second bidding, threw themselves with great gusto into
the work of ransacking the kitchen, while the women made vain efforts to restrain
them and pleaded with Chess to call them off.
‘You don’t want to believe everything those young girls tell you, miss. Mrs Liu
would never dare offend you, she knows it’s more than her job is worth. She did say
that eggs are hard to come by lately, it’s true; but we told her that it was silly of her
to take that line, and that if you say you want something, it’s up to her to find some
means of getting it for you, whatever it is. That’s what we told her. She’d already
admitted that she was in the wrong and put a basin of eggs in the steamer before
you arrived. Look on the stove, if you don’t believe us.’
Chess’s anger subsided somewhat under these blandishments and the young maids
were persuaded, albeit reluct?antly, to discontinue their pillage. Chess continued to
grumble for a bit and make unflattering remarks about the cook, but was eventually
persuaded to return, while Cook Liu, with much banging of pots and pans and
indignant muttering, set about making her a custard. When this was in due course
delivered to her, Chess promptly emptied it on the ground, but the woman who had
taken it prudently refrained from reporting this fact on her return for fear of
provoking further unpleasantness.
When Fivey returned to the kitchen, her mother gave her some soup and a half a
bowlful of congee and told her about the Lycoperdon Snow. Fivey, resolving to share
the latter with her friend and benefactress Parfumée, wrapped half of it up m a
separate sheet of paper and, having waited until it was dusk, when there were not
many people about, made her way to Green Delights, keeping to the trees as much
as possible, so that no one should see her. She managed to get as far as the gate of
the courtyard without being stopped by anyone, but, not daring to go inside,
retreated to the cover of some rose bushes and lurked there until someone should
come out.
Fortunately she did not have long to wait. After about the time it would take to drink
a cup of tea Swallow came out of the gate and Fivey stepped out of the bushes and
called to her to stop. Swallow could not at first make out who it was and had to go up
close and scrutinize her before asking what she wanted.
‘Will you tell Parfumee to come out for a minute, please?’ said Fivey. ‘I want to
have a word with her.’
Swallow laughed softly.
‘You’re too impatient. Your business is sure to be settled within the next ten days,
whatever you do. It’s silly to keep on asking. Anyway, she’s just gone out to the front,
so you’ll have to wait a bit. But perhaps it would be better if you gave me a message
to pass on to her. If you wait till she comes back, you might find yourself inside still
when they shut the gate.’
Fivey handed her the packet.
‘This stuff is Lycoperdon Snow …’
She went on to explain what its properties were and how it was to be taken.
‘I’ve just been given some and I want to share it with her. Would you mind giving it
to her for me, please?’
Leaving the packet in Swallow’s hands, she turned and began swiftly making her way
back again. She had just got as far as the part of the Garden bordering Flowery
Harbour when she saw Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife at the head of a party of stewardesses
coming towards her from the opposite direction. Concealment was impossible; there
was nothing for it but to walk straight up to them and greet them.
‘What are you doing, running around like this?’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife. ‘I thought
you were supposed to be ill.’
Fivey forced herself to smile.
‘I’ve been a bit better this last day or two, so Mother brought me into the Garden
with her for a change of air. I’ve just been to Green Delights for her, to deliver
something.’
‘That can’t be right,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife. ‘I saw your mother go out of the
Garden just now; that’s why I shut the gate. If she’d really sent you to Green Delights,
why didn’t she tell me you were still inside? Why did she go out and let me lock the
gate without saying anything? You must be lying.’
Fivey was momentarily at a loss for a reply.
‘Actually she told me this morning but I forgot,’ she stammered. ‘I only just now
remembered. Probably she didn’t say anything about my being in here because she
thought I’d already gone home.’
Observing her confusion and the halting nature of her reply, Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife
remembered that Silver had lately reported some things missing from Lady Wang’s
apartment which none of the other maids would admit to having taken and
wondered if Fivey might be the thief. It was unfortunate for Fivey that Ciggy and
Lotus, together with a number of older servants, should have arrived on the scene at
that moment and helped to confirm her suspicion.
‘Give her a good grilling, Mrs Lin!’ said one of these new arrivals. ‘She’s been
sneaking to and fro all over the place this last day or two. I don’t know what she’s
been up to, but she’s certainly been up to something.’
‘Yes,’ said Ciggy, ‘and Silver told me yesterday that when they opened that
cupboard in Her Ladyship’s side room the other day they found a whole lot of things
missing. They noticed there was a bottle short when Mrs Lian sent Patience over for
some Essence of Roses, otherwise they’d never have thought of looking.’
‘Oh?’ said Lotus with a pleased-looking smirk. ‘I didn’t know about that. As a
matter of fact I’ve seen a bottle of Essence of Roses somewhere today.’
‘Where?’ Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife asked eagerly. Ever since the bottle from Lady Wang’s
cupboard had been found missing, Xi-feng had been sending Patience round daily to
inquire about the progress of her investigations and she was under great pressure to
discover the thief.
‘In her mother’s kitchen,’ said Lotus.
Lanterns were lit and the little party hurried off to investigate, Fivey protesting
anxiously as they went:
‘But that little bottle came from Master Bao’s room. It was given to me by
Parfumée.’
‘Parfumy!’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife contemptuously. ‘If we find the evidence in the
kitchen, I shall have to report it, and that’s that. It will be up to you to explain
yourself to the mistresses if you can.’
By now they had reached the kitchen and some of them, led by Lotus, went inside to
look. They came out almost immediately with the bottle. Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, thinking
that there might be other stolen articles in the kitchen, ordered a thorough search, in
the course of which the packet of lycoperdon was discovered. Taking this and the
rose essence as evidence, they now led Fivey off to face Li Wan and Tan-chun.
But Li Wan would not see them. Jia Lan was ill, and she was too busy looking after
him to have time for household business. They should see Miss Tan about it, she said.
Tan-chun was not in the office, having already returned to her own apartment. Off
they all trooped then to Tan-chun’s place, where one of their number went inside to
announce their business. The maids were all in the courtyard enjoying the cool
evening air. Tan-chun was inside, washing her hair, they said. Scribe went indoors to
report. It seemed an age before she re-emerged.
‘I told Miss Tan. She said you’d better find Patience and ask her to see Mrs Lian
about it.’
So off they went once more, this time to Wang Xi-feng’s place, where they told their
business to Patience. Patience, on going inside to report, found that her mistress had
just gone to bed. Xi-feng heard her through, after which she gave judgement
summarily as follows:
‘Give the mother forty strokes, turn her out of the Garden, and make sure that she
is never employed inside the Inner Gate again. Give Fivey forty strokes too and pack
her off to the grange. They can either sell her or marry her to one of the hands.’
Patience relayed this verdict, word for word, to Lin Zhi?xiao’s wife and the others
waiting outside. Fivey, shocked and weeping, threw herself on her knees at
Patience’s feet and explained to her how Parfumee had given her the rose essence as
a present.
‘We can clear that up easily enough,’ said Patience. ‘All we’ve got to do is wait until
we can ask Parfumée tomorrow to find out whether she gave it to you or not. But
what about this lycoperdon stuff? That was brought here as a present for Their
Ladyships. No one had the right to touch that before Their Ladyships had seen it.’
Fivey explained that the packet of powder came not from Lady Wang’s store but from
her uncle’s share of the surplus that had been given as a douceur to the gate-people.
‘That puts you in the clear then,’ said Patience, smiling. ‘It’s beginning to look as if
you are wearing the hat for someone else.’ She turned to Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife. ‘It’s too
late to do anything about this now. Mrs Lian has just taken her medicine and gone to
bed; I can’t go pestering her about a little thing like this at this time of night. You’d
better hand her over to the night watch and tell them to look after her until the
morning. I’ll explain it all to Mrs Lian tomorrow, and we’ll see what we can do.’
Lacking the confidence to dispute this countermanding by Patience of her mistress’s
orders, Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife conducted Fivey outside and handed her into the custody
of the watch before continuing about her own business.
Though still unbound, Fivey was unable to move freely and was obliged to stay where
she was put and listen to the ill-natured comments of the old women. Some of them,
assum?ing as a matter of course that she was guilty, rebuked her for her misconduct;
others complained of the trouble that she was causing them.
‘As if we haven’t got work enough already, they have to give us this thief to mind,’
they grumbled. ‘If she does herself an injury or gives us the slip while we’re not
looking, we shall get into trouble!’
And those who in the past had got on badly with her mother rejoiced in the
daughter’s discomfiture and lost no opportunity of taunting and abusing her.
Poor Fivey! Her heart was full of the injustice of it, but there was no one to pour out
her troubles to. The hardships of that night were doubly distressing to a person of
her weak and ailing constitution: no one to give her tea or even a cup of water when
she was thirsty, no pillow or bedding for her to lie on - even if she had felt like
sleeping. The wretched girl spent the whole night in almost continuous weeping.
The enemies of Fivey and her mother, disappointed that the sentence could not be
carried out on them immediately and fearful that the morrow might bring some
remission, rose up next morning at crack of dawn and went secretly to Patience,
hoping, by means of bribes and flattery, to buy her over. They extolled her
resoluteness and drew her attention to various past misdemeanours of Cook Liu in
order to strengthen the evidence against her. Patience accepted their presents,
listened politely to their advice, and as soon as they had gone, slipped quietly over to
Green Delights and asked Aroma whether Parfumée had in fact given some Essence
of Roses to Fivey.
‘I certainly gave some to Parfumée,’ said Aroma, ‘but whether or not she passed it
on to someone else, I couldn’t say.’
She called in Parfumée to ask her. Parfumée, in some alarm, at once confirmed that
she had given the bottle to Fivey and went off to tell Bao-yu what had happened.
Bao?yu was as shocked as she was.
‘The Essence of Roses is no problem,’ he said; ‘but what about the Lycoperdon
Snow? I’m sure what she told them about it was the truth, but if it gets known that
her uncle took it while on duty, then he’s going to get into trouble -which seems a
rather poor exchange for his kindness.’
He thought he had better see Patience himself and point this out to her.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘the Essence of Roses can be accounted for easily enough, but that
Lycoperdon Snow business still looks a bit fishy. Why don’t you be a nice, kind girl,
Patience, and tell them that the Lycoperdon Snow was given to her by Parfumee as
well? Then that disposes of the whole affair.’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Patience, smiling, ‘but she told everyone last night that
her uncle gave it to her. How can she now make out that she got it from you? And
apart from that, don’t forget that the bottle of Essence of Roses from Her Ladyship’s
room has still to be accounted for. If this isn’t it, where are they going to look for it?
It’s not very likely that anyone else will own up to having taken it.’
Skybright stepped over at this point to join in the discussion.
‘The Essence of Roses from Her Ladyship’s place must have been stolen by Sunset
to give to young Huan. It’s as plain as the nose on your face. I don’t understand why
you’re all making such a mystery of it.’
‘I know that as well as you do,’ said Patience, ‘but it’s not so simple. Silver, who was
so worried about finding that bottle missing that she was in tears, did go, very quietly
and nicely, and ask Sunset if she had taken it, and if Sunset had had the grace to say
‘yes’, Silver herself would have done nothing, and I’m quite sure that no one else
would have made an issue of it. Who’s going to stir up trouble about a little thing like
that? But unfortunately not only would Sunset not admit to having taken it, but she
even had the gall to accuse Silver of taking it herself. The two of them made such a
hullabaloo between them that soon everyone in the household had heard about it.
By that stage I couldn’t ignore the matter any longer, even if I’d wanted to. I had to
investigate it. And the first thing I found, of course, was that the one doing all the
accusing was actually the thief. But without any evidence, there was nothing much I
could do.’
‘I can take responsibility for that too,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You can tell them I stole the
bottle from Her Ladyship’s room to give the girls a scare. Now everything is
accounted for.’
‘No doubt it’s an act of merit to clear someone else of suspicion,’ said Aroma, ‘but
Her Ladyship won’t be very pleased when she hears. She’ll say you’ve been up to
your old childish tricks again.’
‘Oh, that’s of no consequence,’ said Patience. ‘We could of course clear this matter
up quite easily by looking for the stolen bottle in Mrs Zhao’s room. The only reason I
hesitate to do that is because I’m afraid it would make things difficult for a certain
person whose feelings I do care about very much. I know she would be distressed,
and the last thing I want to do is “damage the jade vase while trying to hit the
mouse”.’
She held three fingers up as she said this to indicate that it was Tan-chun she was
referring to. Aroma and the rest nodded in agreement.
‘That’s true. Perhaps it would be better if Bao-yu took all the blame.’
‘Yes,’ said Patience, ‘but at the same time I think we ought to call Sunset and Silver
here and get this matter properly sorted out. We don’t want whoever it is to think
she can get away with it. If we do nothing, she’s sure to think it’s be?cause we
haven’t the wit to find out rather than that it’s for the reason I’ve just said, and she’ll
think she can go on stealing things with impunity.’
This being agreed on, Patience sent someone to call them over.
‘Well, you can stop worrying now, you two,’ she said when they had arrived. ‘They
think they’ve found the thief.’
‘Where is she?’ said Silver.
‘At the moment she’s in Mrs Lian’s room being questioned,’ said Patience. ‘She’s
admitted taking everything they’ve asked her about. I happen to know myself that
she didn’t take them and is only confessing because she’s frightened. Master Bao
can’t bear the idea of an innocent person suffering and has already agreed to take
responsibility for some of them. As regards the rest, I could tell them who the real
thief is, but there are certain difficulties. One is that the real thief is a very good
friend of mine. The other is that the receiver of stolen goods, who is a pretty poor
specimen, is closely related to a very nice person who would be very much upset if all
of this were to come into the open. It looks as if I shall have to ask Master Bao to take
responsibility for the whole lot, so that everyone is clear of suspicion. Before I do
that, however, there’s something I should like to be clear about first. Can I be sure, if I
do ask him to do us this favour, that everyone is going to be a bit more careful in
future? Because if not, then rather than stand by and see an innocent person suffer, I
shall have to tell all I know to Mrs Lian.’
A blush had overspread Sunset’s face while Patience was saying this. Her natural
decency suddenly getting the better of her compelled her now to speak.
‘Don’t worry, Patience. There’s no need for any innocent person to suffer and
there’s no need for that other person you mentioned to be upset. I stole those things.
It was because Mrs Zhao kept on at me to take them. I stole them to give to Huan.
Even when Her Ladyship was here I often used to steal things for him, so that he
could give them away to his friends. I thought that the fuss made when they found
out that things were missing would die down in a day or two. I can’t stand by and let
an innocent person take the blame. You’ll have to take me with you to Mrs Lian and
let me make a clean breast of it.’
Her courage took all of them by surprise.
‘You’re a good sort, Sunset, I always knew you were,’ said Bao-yu admiringly, ‘but
there’s really no need for you to tell her. All I’ve got to do is say that I stole those
things for a lark, to give you all a scare, and that now there’s been all this fuss about
them, I feel I ought to own up. There’s only one thing, though. I really must ask you
girls to be more careful in future, for all our sakes.’
‘I did it,’ said Sunset, ‘it’s up to me to face the music.’
Patience and Aroma disagreed.
‘That’s not the way to look at it at all. If you confess, they’re sure to worm
something out about Mrs Zhao, and that will upset Miss Tan again when she gets to
hear about it. You’d much better let Master Bao accept responsibility, so that
everyone is cleared. Nobody except the few of us here knows the truth, so it’s
terribly easy for him to do this. But as Master Bao says, you really will have to be
more careful in future. If you must take anything, at least wait until Her Ladyship is
here. When she is back, you can give the whole room away if you like, because then
we shan’t be involved!’
Sunset hung her head and pondered for some moments before finally agreeing to go
along with this.
When it was settled exactly what they should do, Patience went with Parfumee and
the two maids from Lady Wang’s apartment to the watch-room, called out Fivey, and
quietly instructed her to say that the Lycoperdon Snow as well as the Essence of
Roses had been given to her by Parfumée. Fivey was deeply grateful. Patience next
took Fivey with her to Wang Xi-feng’s place, where Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife and her helpers
had already been waiting for some time with Fivey’s mother in their custody.
‘I brought her here first thing,’ Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife told Patience in reference to her
prisoner. ‘As that left no one to get the lunch ready, I put Qin Xian’s wife temporarily
in charge, so that the young ladies should get their meal on time.’
‘Who is Qin Xian’s wife?’ said Patience. ‘I don’t think I know her.’
‘She does night duty in the south corner of the Garden. She doesn’t do anything in
the daytime: that’s probably why you don’t know her. Very high cheek-bones and big
round eyes. She’s a very clean, lively little body.’
‘Yes, of course you know her, Patience,’ said Silver. ‘She’s the auntie of Miss Ying’s
maid, Chess. Chess’s father works for Sir She, but her uncle and auntie work on this
side of the mansion with us.’
Patience remembered with a laugh.
‘Oh, that’s who you’ve chosen! If you’d told me that, I should have known who you
meant.’ She laughed again. ‘You’ve been a bit too quick with your appointment. It’s
all cleared up now, this business. The waters have gone down and we can see the
rocks. We know now who the real thief was who stole that stuff from Her Ladyship’s
room. It was Bao-yu. He went round to Her Ladyship’s apartment some days ago and
asked Silver and Sunset for something and just for a tease the silly girls said he
couldn’t have it, because they couldn’t give him anything while Her Ladyship was
away. So he simply slipped in later on when they weren’t there and helped himself.
When these two found the things missing, they were scared out of their wits. But as
soon as Bao-yu heard that someone else had been accused of taking the things, he
told me everything. He even brought them round to show me, so that I could see
they exactly corresponded with what the girls had told me was missing. As regards
the Lycoperdon Snow, that was something that Bao-yu had got from outside. He’s
been giving it away to all kinds of people - not only in the Garden: one or two of the
old nannies begged some off him to give to their relations outside and they have
given it to other people as presents; and Aroma gave some of hers to Parfumee and
that lot and they’ve been passing the stuff to and fro between them?selves. So you
see, it’s all over the place. The two baskets that were left in the jobs room the other
day for Their Ladyships are still untouched. The seals on them haven’t been broken.
So as far as that’s concerned, there are no grounds for a charge either. If you’ll wait
here a few moments longer, I’m just going in to tell Mrs Lian about this and we’ll see
what she says.’
Patience then went into the bedroom and repeated almost verbatim to Xi-feng what
she had just been telling Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife.
‘That’s as may be,’ said Xi-feng when she had finished; ‘but we all know how ready
Bao-yu is to cover up for other people. Someone only has to go to him with a
hard-luck story - especially if there’s a bit of flattery thrown in with it - and he’ll own
up to anything in order to get them off. If we believe him now, how are we going to
deal with more serious cases later on? I think this needs going into more carefully. I
think you ought to get hold of those girls from Her Ladyship’s apartment and - well, I
wouldn’t say torture them exactly, but you could get them to kneel in the sun on
broken china all day without anything to eat or drink. If one day doesn’t make them
confess, just go on day after day until they do. They’re sure to give in sooner or later,
even if they’re made of iron.’
‘And as for that Liu woman,’ she went on, ‘you know what they say. When flies
gather on an egg, it’s generally a sign that there’s a crack in it. She may not have
stolen anything in this instance, but I suspect she’s no better than she should be for
all these people to be complaining about her. We’ll let her off the flogging, of course,
but I still think we ought to dismiss her. Even in the Emperor’s court people get
punished for what they call “guilt by association”, so she can’t complain if we sack
her merely on suspicion.’
‘Yes, but why bother?’ said Patience. ‘They say that where mercy is possible, mercy
should be shown. What better opportunity than this could you have of showing
yourself merciful for once? Look at all the trouble you give your?self on account of
these people, and they aren’t even your own household: it’s Lady Xing’s household
that you really belong to. And where does it all get you, at the end of the day? All you
do is build up a lot of resentment against yourself and turn a lot of nasty, spiteful
people into your enemies. A person in your delicate health can’t afford to make
enemies. Think of all the time it took you to conceive a man-child - and then to lose it
after carrying it inside you for six or seven months! How do we know that that wasn’t
brought on by too much worrying about this sort of thing? I think you ought to start
straight away taking things a bit easier. Close your eyes to things a bit oftener. “What
the eye doesn’t see the heart doesn’t grieve”!’
Patience’s little homily quickly won Xi-feng to a better humour.
‘All right,’ she said, laughing. ‘Do as you wish. I’m not going to get myself worked up
about it.’
‘Now you’re talking sensibly,’ said Patience happily, and going out of the bedroom,
proceeded to dispose of the business outside in the way she had all along intended
to.
But more of that in the next chapter.
CHAPTER 62

A tipsy Xiang-yun sleeps on a
peony-petal pillow
And a grateful Caltrop unfastens
her pomegranate skirt



‘It’s the sign of a really thriving household,’ said Patience, ‘that their big troubles
turn into little ones and their little ones into nothing at all. To make a great song and
dance over a trifle like this would be plain ridiculous. You can take them both back to
the kitchen. The mother is to keep her job. Qin Xian’s wife will have to go back where
she came from. There is to be no further mention of this matter. Let there be no
slackening in the daily inspection of the Garden, though. That’s most important.’
As she turned to go, Cook Liu and her daughter stepped quickly forwards and
kotowed their thanks. Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife then conducted them back to the Garden,
after which she reported to Li Wan and Tan-chun on what had been decided. Both
expressed satisfaction that the matter had resolved itself without further trouble.
The victory that had been gained by Chess and her faction was thus an empty one,
and Qin Xian’s wife, that aunt of Chess’s whose installation in the kitchen had been
the result of long and patient scheming, enjoyed only the briefest moment of
triumph in her new position. Beginning in a great bustle with a general stock-taking
of the kitchen’s equipment and stores, she detected - or claimed to detect - various
shortages in the latter. Two piculs of best rice were missing, she said; a month’s
supply of general purpose rice had been overdrawn; and the amount of charcoal was
not what it was supposed to be. While so engaged, she was at the same time making
discreet arrangements for the conveyance of various ‘presents’ (they included, by a
strange coincidence, a pannier of charcoal and a load of rice) to Lin Zhi-xiao’s
quarters outside; and there were to be presents for the clerks who worked in
Accounts. She also prepared several dishes for a little repast to which she invited her
new colleagues.
‘Now that I’ve got this job, I rely entirely on your support to run things here,’ she
told them. ‘So if there are any little matters that I fall down in, I shall look to you all
to help me out.’
Suddenly, in the midst of this activity, new orders arrived:
‘As soon as you have finished serving this lunch, you must leave. Liu has been
cleared. They’re putting her back in charge here.’
Stunned though she was by this news, the wretched woman had at once to begin
packing her things, and soon, with drums muffled and colours furled, beat a hasty
retreat from the kitchen. The things she had given away to others - pointlessly, it now
appeared - had to be made good, in some cases by selling her own possessions. Even
Chess, for all her fury, was powerless to help her.
Ever since the fuss made by Silver about the missing objects, Aunt Zhao, the secret
recipient of many of the things which Sunset had stolen, had been living in fear of
discovery. Each day, as she made her surreptitious inquiries about the current
progress of investigations, she perspired afresh. When Sunset herself suddenly came
in and announced that Bao-yu had owned up and that there was nothing more to
fear, she was naturally very much relieved. The effect on Jia Huan, however, was
somewhat different. He immediately became suspicious, and taking out all the things
that Sunset had been at such pains to get for him, he threw them in her face.
‘Two-faced thing!’ he shouted. ‘You must be thick with Bao-yu or he wouldn’t have
covered up for you. If you were prepared to take those things in the first place, you
ought to have kept quiet about it and not told anyone. Now that you’ve told him, I
don’t want them any more. They would only remind me of your treachery.’
Sunset swore by the most desperate oaths that she had been faithful to him; she
even wept; but Jia Huan was adamant.
‘If it weren’t that we used to be friends,’ he said, ‘I’d go straight along now to Aunt
Lian and tell her that you stole those things. I’d tell her that you offered them to me,
but I wouldn’t take them. Think about that then, and consider yourself lucky to have
got away with it!’
With those words he flounced out of the room, to the great indignation of his mother,
who shouted after him angrily.
‘Ungrateful little blackguard! What do you mean by it?’
Sunset meanwhile was weeping as if her heart would break.
‘Poor child!’ said Aunt Zhao, trying to comfort her. ‘He doesn’t appreciate you. But
at least I know you are faithful to him. Let me look after these things for you. He’s
sure to come round to a more sensible way of thinking in a day or two.’
She would have taken them, but Sunset forestalled her, sweeping them angrily into a
bundle, which, when no one was looking, she carried into the Garden and emptied
out over the lake. Some of the things sank straight to the bottom, the rest floated
about on the surface of the water. She was still angry when she went to bed, and
cried all night long under the bed-clothes.
*
The day of Bao-yu’s birthday arrived - the same day, it had been discovered, as that
on which Bao-qin had hers. Because Lady Wang was away, rather less fuss was made
of it than in previous years. There were the customary four kinds of birthday present
from Abbot Zhang together with a new amulet to replace the one he had worn
during the previous year, and from the monks and nuns of various temples a token
share of the day’s offerings accompanied by such other little gifts as the religious are
wont to give on these occasions: little figures of Old Longevity, sacred colour-prints,
offertory scrolls, talismans inscribed with his personal star guardian, and annually
renewable lockets inscribed with the current year-star. A number of the blind
ballad-singers both male and female regularly patronized by the household called in
to offer their colourful felicitations. His uncle Wang Zi-teng’s family sent him the
usual suit of clothes and two pairs of shoes and socks, together with a hundred little
peach-shaped birthday cakes and a hundred little bundles of the finest ‘silver thread’
vermicelli. From his Aunt Xue he received ex?actly the same presents as from his
uncle but in appropriately reduced amounts. The only other presents from senior
members of the family were a pair of shoes from You-shi and a heavily-embroidered
‘propitious encounter’ purse with a tiny gold image of Old Longevity in it and a piece
of Persian ware from Xi-feng. As in previous years, a distribution of alms was made
on his behalf to the monks of various temples.
And then of course there were Bao-qin’s presents; but to enumerate them as well
would be tedious.
The presents which Bao-yu received from the girls were of a less formal nature and
chosen more to mark the occasion than for their intrinsic value: a fan from one, a
specimen of calli?graphy from another, a painting or a poem.
On the morning of his birthday Bao-yu rose at dawn, and after completing his toilet,
put on his most formal clothes and went out to the main front courtyard of the
mansion, where Li Gui and three other of his grooms were waiting for him by a table
they had’ made ready with an incense burner and candlesticks and offerings as an
altar to Heaven and Earth. Bao-yu lit some sticks of incense and made his
prostrations, poured out a libation of tea, and burned the paper offerings and
offertory scrolls. Then he went round to the Ning-guo mansion and kotowed his
respects to the ancestors, first in the shrine and then in the hall. Emerging from the
latter, he knelt down on the terrace outside and ‘kotowed upwards’ to his absent
dear ones - Grandmother Jia, Jia Zheng and Lady Wang - rising on his knees after
each prostration and lifting his clasped hands up in front of him. He called in at the
main apartment on his way out and made his kotow to You-shi, after which he sat
and talked to her for a bit before returning to Rong-guo House. His first visit there
was to Aunt Xue, who made vigorous - though, of course, unsuccessful at?tempts to
prevent his kotowing to her. After that he called on Xue Ke, who was slightly senior to
Bao-yu but not enough to warrant an obeisance and whose efforts to prevent a
kotow, therefore, were more successful. After exchanging a few words with Xue Ke,
he went back into the Garden. There he found Skybright and Musk waiting for him.
They were accompanied by two junior maids holding a red carpet which was
intended for kneeling on. Attended by these four, he now proceeded to visit all those
in the Garden beginning with Li Wan who were senior to himself. Then back to the
mansion again and out through the inner gate to call on Nannie Li and three other of
his former nannies, with each of whom he was expected to spend some time in
conversation. On his way back the servants inside the Garden gate would have liked
to kotow to him, but he would not let them; and when he was once more back in his
room, Aroma and the other maids offered him only verbal greetings and did not
attempt to kneel. Lady Wang had forbidden the maids to kotow to younger members
of the family for fear it might shorten their lives.
Soon after this Jia Huan and Jia Lan arrived. Aroma prevented them from kneeling
and made them sit down for a while. As soon as they had gone, Bao-yu declared
himself tired out by all the walking he had done and put his feet up on the bed. But
not for long. He had barely had time to drink half a cupful of tea when there was a
confused sound of chatter?ing and giggling outside and eight or nine maids burst
laugh?ing into the room. There was Ebony and Periwinkle and Kingfisher and Picture,
Xing Xiu-yan’s maid Signet, the nursemaid carrying Xi-feng’s little girl Qiao-jie, and
two of the maids from Lady Wang’s room, Avis and Avocet. He noticed that they
were carrying a red carpet between them.
‘Where are the birthday noodles?’ they said. ‘See how your doorway is crowded
with people who have come to wish you happy returns!’
No sooner were the maids inside than Tan-chun, Xiang-yun, Ba-qin, Xiu-yan and
Xi-chun appeared behind them. Bao-yu hurried out to greet them. ‘How kind of you
all to come!’ he said, and as he ushered them inside, he called out to Aroma to get
them all some tea. A great deal of polite tussling ensued before his guests could
finally be persuaded to sit down. Aroma now brought in tea for them all on a tray;
but they had taken no more than a sip of it when Patience arrived, dressed to the
nines in all her finery, and Bao-yu had to get up once more and hurry out to greet
her.
‘When I went to Feng’s place just now,’ he said, ‘the person who announced me
told me that she couldn’t see me, so I asked if I might see you instead. Why wouldn’t
you let me?’
‘The first time you sent in I couldn’t come out because I was doing your Cousin
Feng’s hair,’ said Patience. ‘When you sent in the second time and said that you
wanted me to receive you in her place, I naturally couldn’t let you because it would
have been too great an honour. It is I who should kotow to you -which is what I have
come to do now.’
‘But that’s too great an honour for me!’ said Bao-yu, laughing.
Aroma nevertheless brought a chair over and made Bao-yu sit in it. Patience made
him a curtsey. Bao-yu, already on his feet again, answered it with a bow and pumped
his hands. Patience went down on her knees. Bao-yu knelt down too. At once Aroma
raised Patience to her feet, whereupon she curtseyed to Bao-yu once more and
Bao-yu, who had got up when she did, answered her with another bow and another
pumping of the hands.
‘Now another one,’ said Aroma smiling and giving him a nudge.
‘Why?’ said Bao-yu. ‘We’ve finished.’
‘She’s finished making her birthday reverence to you,’ said Aroma; ‘but it’s her
birthday today too, so you still have to make yours to her.’
Bao-yu bowed again, delightedly.
‘So it’s your birthday too, Patience?’
Patience returned his bow with another curtsey.
Xiang-yun took hold of Bao-qin with one hand and Xiu-yan with the other.
‘At this rate the four of you are going to be making rever?ences to each other all
day long!’
‘Oh, of course!’ said Tan-chun. ‘It’s Cousin Xing’s birth?day as well. I’d quite
forgotten.’
She turned to one of the maids:
‘Go and tell Mrs Lian about this; and get them to send another lot of presents like
the ones they did for Miss Qin to Miss Ying’s apartment.’
The maid went off to do her bidding. Now that the fact that today was her birthday
had become public knowledge, Xiu-yan was obliged to make a round of the
apartments, bowing and kotowing to everybody, as Bao-yu had had to do before her.
‘Interesting, all these coincidences,’ said Tan-chun. ‘You expect a few birthdays
every month; but it’s only when you get a lot of people living together like us that
you begin getting two or three of them on the same day. We even have a birthday on
New Year’s Day in this family: Yuan-chun’s. She comes first in that as in everything
else. I suppose that’s what makes her so lucky. It was great-grandfather’s birthday as
well, New Year’s Day. The fifteenth of the first month is Aunt Xing’s birthday and also
Cousin Chai’s - another coincidence. The first of the third month is Mother’s birthday.
The ninth of the third is Cousin Lian’s. We haven’t got anyone with a birthday in the
second month.’
   ‘Yes you have,’ said Aroma. ‘Miss Lin’s is in the second month, on the
twenty-second. It’s true there’s no one of your surname, though.’
‘My memory is hopeless!’ said Tan-chun.
‘Not at all,’ said Bao-yu. He pointed smilingly at Aroma: ‘She only remembers it
because her own birthday is on that day.’
      ‘Oh, you’re on the same day as her, are you? I don’t recollect your ever having
come round and kotowed to me on that day,’ said Tan-chun teasingly. ‘And Patience:
this is the first time I’ve heard that your birthday was today.’
      ‘What sort of great ladies do you think we are to be bothering with birthdays?’
said Patience. ‘Kotows and birthday presents are not for the likes of us. My birthday
is just another day, to be got through with as little fuss as possible. I don’t suppose
you’d ever have known about it at all if she hadn’t let on. Now that you do know, I’ll
gladly come round and kotow to you when you get back later to your room.’
      ‘I don’t in the least want you to do that,’ said Tan-chun. ‘On the other hand, I
should very much like us to celebrate your birthday for once. In fact, I shan’t be
content unless we do.’
      ‘Hear, hear!’ said Bao-yu and Xiang-yun.
Tan-chun gave instructions to one of the maids:
      ‘Go to Mrs Lian and tell her, from us all, that we want to keep Patience with us
for the day. Tell her we are going to pool together and celebrate her birthday.’
The maid went off, laughing excitedly. It was some time before she returned with
Xi-feng’s answer.
‘Mrs Lian says thank you very much for the honour you are doing her. She says she
doesn’t know what you will be giving Patience to eat, but provided you let her have
some of it, she will agree to leave her here in peace.’
The cousins and maids all laughed when they heard this message.
‘It so happens that, as the birthday noodles and all the other things needed for
today’s meals are being seen to by the big kitchen outside, the Garden kitchen has
got nothing to do today,’ said Tan-chun. ‘So when we’ve made our collection, we can
give it to Cook Liu and get her to prepare this private party for us in the Garden
kitchen.’
The others having readily agreed that this would be best, Tan-chun sent someone to
tell Li Wan, Bao-chai and Dai-yu what had been decided and invite them to
contribute. She also sent for Cook Liu and asked her to prepare a two-table banquet
in the Garden kitchen. Somewhat puzzled by this request, Cook Liu pointed out that
on this particular occasion the catering was all being done in the outside kitchen.
‘Yes,’ said Tan-chun, ‘but this is only for us. Today is Patience’s birthday and we
want to pool together and have a special little party for her. So do something nice for
us, will you? You can bring the bill to my place afterwards and I will give you the
money.’
‘Miss Patience’s birthday today?’ said Cook Liu. ‘Well I never!’ And she stepped
briskly forward and made her a kotow. Patience bent over in confusion and raised her
to her feet.
The cook hurried off to begin preparations. Tan-chun now invited Bao-yu to
accompany her to the ‘jobs room’ and break his fast there with some noodles.
Hav?ing first waited for Li Wan and Bao-chai to arrive, she sent someone to ask if
Aunt Xue and Dai-yu would care to join them. Now that the weather was warmer,
Dai-yu’s illness was very much better than it had been and she was able to come.
With so many people in party dresses the crowded office was beginning to take on
an unusually gay and festive appearance. Unfortunately a formal present for Bao-yu -
a handkerchief, a fan, some sticks of incense and a length of silk - arrived at that
moment from Xue Ke, and Bao-yu had to abandon the female company of the office
and go to take noodles with Xue Ke.
Since the Xue and Jia families each had a birthday on this same day, each was
supposed to entertain the other with birthday wine. Accordingly, at about noon that
day, Bao-qin was brought over by Bao-chai to make a birthday reverence to her elder
brother and to wait on him and Bao-yu while they drank the wine. But Bao-chai was
impatient of punctilio.
‘There is no need for you to send our wine over there,’ she told Xue Ke. ‘This year
at least we can dispense with those empty formalities. You can invite our employees
from the shop in to help you finish it. Cousin Bao and I must go back to the Garden
now. Excuse us for leaving you like this, but we have other people there waiting for
us to entertain them.’
‘I won’t try to detain you then,’ said Xue Ke politely. ‘To tell the truth, our people
from the shop will feel freer to call here when you are gone.’
Having apologized to Xue Ke on his own account, Bao-yu accompanied the two girls
back into the Garden. As they passed into it through the corner gate, Bao-chai made
the women there lock it up after them and hand her the key.
‘Why is it necessary to lock this gate?’ Bao-yu asked her. ‘There are only a few
people using it, and now that you and Aunt and Qin are all three living in the Garden,
it must be an awful nuisance if you have to lock and unlock it every time you need to
go and fetch something from your place outside.’
‘One can’t be too careful,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Look at all the incidents you people have
been having during the past few days; yet not once have any of our people been
implicated. I put that down entirely to the fact that this gate is kept constantly locked.
If it were left open, other people besides us would want to use it for the convenience
of taking short cuts; and as it would be too invidious to begin distinguishing between
who might use the gate and who might not, it is better to keep it permanently locked
and stop everyone using it, even though it means a certain amount of inconvenience
for Mamma and me, because at least it ensures that when there is any trouble none
of out people will be under suspicion.’
‘You heard about the missing objects, then?’ Bao-yu asked her.
‘You mean the Essence of Roses and Lycoperdon Snow?’ said Bao-chai. ‘I don’t
suppose you would have known even about them if your own protege’s had not been
involved. No, I was thinking about something rather more serious than that
-something which, for all our sakes, I hope will never come to light. If it does, a great
many people will be implicated. I can tell you this, because you have nothing to do
with the management of the household. I told Patience the other day too. Patience is
an intelligent girl, and as her mistress cannot get about now, I thought she ought to
know about it. As I say, I hope nothing will come of it; but if it does blow up, Patience
will have been warned and will know how to safeguard herself against being
wrongfully accused again. Bear in mind what I am saying so that you are warned, too,
if anything should happen. But don’t let anyone else know that I told you this.’
They had been approaching Drenched Blossoms while she was speaking. In the
pavilion at the centre of the bridge a group of ten or so girls - Aroma, Caltrop, Scribe,
Skybright, Musk, Parfumée, étamine, Nénuphar and one or two others they could
not identify - were leaning over the railings looking at the fish in the water below. As
Bao-yu and his two cousins approached, they chorused out to them:
‘The party’s all ready in the Peony Garden. Hurry up and take your places!’
Taking the maids with them, the cousins made their way to the lakeside Peony
Garden in the midst of which was the large, open summerhouse where the tables for
the party had been laid. Even You-shi had been invited and was already sitting there
waiting for them. In fact, by now almost every?one had arrived except Patience
herself.
Patience had intended to drop in only briefly at Xi-feng’s house in order to change
into something more suitable for the party; but no sooner had she reached it than
presents began arriving from the Lin and Lai households. The bearers of these proved
to be only the forerunners of a stream of callers from every level of the domestic staff,
who arrived in twos and threes, bringing her gifts or offering their congratulations.
Patience was kept continuously busy dealing with these callers, rewarding the
deliverers of gifts, thanking those who had come in person to felicitate her, and
running in and out to show her presents to Xi-feng. She kept only a few of these for
herself; the rest she either courteously returned or immediately gave away. Even
when she had finished with her visitors she had to serve Xi-feng her lunch of noodles
and wait until she had finished it before she was at last able to get changed and hurry
back into the Garden.
A number of maids who had been sent out by the others to look for her took charge
of her as she entered it and carried her off to the summerhouse. It was a dazzling
sight there that met her eyes: not perhaps the
chelonian tables, lotus-cushioned chairs
of the poet; but no effort had been spared to make it an eye-catching and appetizing
spread.
A friendly laugh greeted her arrival.
‘Now all the birthday folk are here!’
They wanted to make her and the other three – Bao-yu, Bao-qin and Xiu-yan - sit at
the head of the feast, but as Aunt Xue was present, all four of them naturally refused.
‘A slow old buffer like me is no fit company for you young people,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘I
should only feel uncomfortable if I stayed. Let me go and lie down in the jobs room. I
don’t feel like eating anything and I’m not much of a drinker. You will be much better
able to look after your guests if I am not here.’
You-shi and the others loudly insisted that she should stay. Only Bao-chai dissented.
‘Whether or not we should get on better without Mamma,’ she said, ‘I’m sure
Mamma herself would be happier lying down in the jobs room than sitting here with
us. If there is anything here she fancies, we can have it sent over to her and she will
be able to eat it there on her own in comfort. Besides, there is no one in charge there
at the moment. If Mamma is there, she will be able to keep an eye on things.’
     ‘Oh well, in that case we’ll let her go,’ said Tan-chun smiling. ‘Obedience is the
best obeisance, as they say.’
     She went with the others to escort her aunt to the jobs room and personally
supervised the arrangement of various pillows and cushions by the junior maids.
     ‘Now,’ she said to these junior maids when Aunt Xue had been comfortably
settled, ‘if you will stay here and massage Mrs Xue’s legs for her and fetch her tea or
anything when she asks you without making up all sorts of wonderful excuses, I
shouldn’t be surprised if later on, when we send some nice things for her to eat, she
doesn’t give some of them to you. So mind you don’t go away!’
     The girls all promised that they would stay.
     When they got back, Tan-chun made Bao-qin and Xiu-yan sit at the head of the
top table and Patience and Bao-yu at right-angles to them on the left and right ends.
She and Faith?ful sat shoulder to shoulder on the fourth side, facing Bao-qin and
Xiu-yan. At the table parallel to the west wall Bao-chai, Dai-yu, Xiang-yun, Ying-chun
and Xi-chun sat in order of seniority on the two longer sides and Caltrop and Silver
on the shorter sides, one at either end. You-shi and Li Wan sat at the longer sides of
the table parallel to the east wall, with Aroma and Sunset to left and right of them on
the shorter sides. The fourth table was occupied by the remaining maids, Nightingale,
Oriole, Skybright, Periwinkle and Chess, sitting around it in no particular order.
      No sooner were they all seated than Tan-chun rose to her feet again, wine-kettle
in hand, intending to drink toasts with each of the four ‘birthday people’; but the
birthday four, realizing that if they allowed one of their hosts to do this, a dozen or
more would follow, objected strenuously.
      ‘If you are going to start this nonsense,’ said Bao-qin, ‘we shall none of us get
settled until evening.’
      The point was taken and Tan-chun sat down again, where?upon the blind
ballad-singers, who had tagged along with the others, began tuning their instruments
for a birthday ode. This time everyone objected.
      ‘None of us like that old stuff. Why don’t you go to the jobs room and entertain
Mrs Xue?’
While they were about it, they made a selection from the various dishes on the table
for the people conducting the blind women to take with them to Aunt Xue.
‘Just sitting here making polite conversation is not going to be much fun,’ said
Bao-yu when the singers had been disposed of. ‘We ought to play a drinking game.’
Various suggestions were made, but none met with everyone’s approval.
‘I’ll tell you what,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Why not write the names of different games down
on slips of paper and put it to the draw?’
‘Good idea!’ said the others, and sent for an inkstone and writing-brush and some
slips of fancy paper.
To Caltrop, who in addition to writing poetry had lately been learning some
calligraphy, the opportunity of exercising her new skill proved irresistible and she
jumped up and insisted on doing the writing. After thinking for a bit, the com?pany
managed to produce some ten or more names of drink?ing games which Tan-chun
dictated one by one to Caltrop to write down on the slips. The slips were then folded
up small, doubled over, and thrown into a jar. Tan-chun asked Patience to draw. She
did so with a pair of chopsticks, stirring the slips around with them before fishing one
out for her inspection. Tan-chun unrolled it and read it out.
‘Cover-ups.’
‘Cover-ups?’ said Bao-chai, laughing. ‘Why, that’s the grandfather of them all! They
played “cover-ups” in ancient times. Admittedly, we don’t know exactly how they
played it then and our modern “cover-ups” is a comparatively recent invention; but
it’s still very, very difficult. I should think at least half the people here wouldn’t know
how to play it. We’d much better set that one aside and pick something a little less
literary that everyone can understand.’
‘We can’t set it aside now that it’s been drawn,’ said Tan?-chun. ‘I suggest that we
draw again, and if it’s the sort of game that everyone can enjoy, those who want to
can play that game while the rest of us are playing cover-ups.’
This time she got Aroma to draw. The name on the slip she picked out was
‘guess-fingers’. Xiang-yun greeted it with approval.
‘Now there’s a nice, simple, lively game! There’s a game that suits me down to the
ground! None of your stuffy old cover-ups for me! The very thought of it gives me a
headache! I’m for guess-fingers!’
‘Isn’t it just like her to reduce the entire party to anarchy before we have even
begun!’ said Tan-chun. ‘Cousin Chai, you must sconce her for me.’
Bao-chai forthwith obliged by forcing a whole cupful of wine down Xiang-yun’s
throat.
‘Now,’. said Tan-chun, herself gulping down a little wine, ‘I’m your M.C. I take it you
don’t need me to read the rules out. You just have to do as I tell you. We’ll get
someone to fetch dice and a cup and each of us will throw in turn, beginning with
Cousin Qin. Anyone who throws the same number as someone else will pair with
that person for cover-ups.’
Bao-qin threw a three. The others on the top table each threw a different number.
Caltrop on the second table was the first to throw another three.
‘We’d better confine ourselves to objects inside this room, don’t you think?’
Bao-qin suggested. ‘Otherwise the range of possibilities will be too large.’
‘Certainly,’ said Tan-chun. ‘And whoever hasn’t given the right answer after three
guesses must drink a cup of wine as a penalty. You begin.’
Bao-qin thought for a bit.
‘Market.’
Caltrop, who was new to this game, could see nothing in the room which could
combine with ‘market’ to make a quota?tion; but Xiang-yun, whose eyes had been
darting busily around from the moment the clue was announced, happened
suddenly to catch sight of the inscription that hung up over the door:
PEONY GARDEN
She guessed at once that Bao-qin must be thinking of the passage in the thirteenth
book of the Analects where Confucius tells a person who wanted to study
horticulture that he would ‘much better go to some old fellow who kept a market
garden and learn about it from him’. As Caltrop could still not guess what the
‘market’ indicated and the others were beginning to drum her for an answer,
Xiang-yun, who had already thought of a matching quotation from a line in one of
Wang Wei’s poems
Sometimes I to my herb garden repair
leaned over and whispered to Caltrop to give ‘herb’ as her reply. But Dai-yu had
spotted her and was quick to tell the others.
‘You’ll have to sconce her again. She’s been telling her how to answer.’
Xiang-yun was obliged to down another cupful of wine. She was so vexed that she
rapped Dai-yu on the knuckles with a chopstick. Caltrop, too had to drink a sconce.
The next pairing occurred when Bao-chai threw the same number as Tan-chun.
Tan-chun’s clue was ‘man’.
‘Isn’t that a bit wide?’ said Bao-chai.
‘All right,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I’ll give you another clue. That should narrow it down a
bit. “Shut”.’
Bao-chai thought for some moments. There was certainly plenty of chicken-meat on
the table. Tan-chun must be referring to ‘cock-man’ from Wang Wei’s
The red-capped cock-man has proclaimed the dawn
and ‘cock-shut’ from Luo Yin’s
At cock-shut still upon my book to pore.
She therefore countered with ‘niche’, basing herself on a line from the sixty-third
poem in the Poetry Classic:
The cock roosts in his niche.
The two girls smiled at each other and each took a sip of wine in celebration of a
successful turn.
      Xiang-yun, unwilling to wait longer, was already in the midst of a game of
guess-fingers with Bao-yu. The two of them were both shouting at the tops of their
voices. At the other side of the room You-shi and Faithful were also shouting at each
other ‘Five-a, five-a!’ ‘Seven-a, seven-a!’ ‘Eight-a, eight-a!’ from their separate tables,
while Patience and Aroma, sitting at adjacent ends of the same two tables, made up
another pair and contributed to the noise. To the racket made by their shouting was
added, in the case of the five female players, the clashing of bracelets every time
they gestured. Soon Xiang-?yun had beaten Bao-yu and Aroma had beaten Patience.
It was agreed that the losers should drink a cup of wine each and do something
before and something after drinking it: the question was, what? Xiang-yun had plenty
of suggestions for Bac-yu.
‘Before drinking you must give a well-known quotation in prose, a well-known
quotation in verse, a dominoes three?some, a song-title, and the day’s forecast from
an almanac, all five to hang together so that they make continuous sense. After
drinking you must give the name of some food you see here on the table which can
be used in more than one sense.’
The others laughed.
‘No one but her could think up such a rigmarole,’ they said. ‘Still, it should be
interesting.’
They began urging Bao-yu to start.
‘Have a heart!’ said Bao-yu. ‘I need a bit of time to think if I’m to get through that
lot.’
‘Drink the wine,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’ll do the rest for you.’
Bao-yu drank his cup obediently and listened.
‘One. “Scudding clouds race the startled mallard across the water”,’ said Dai-yu.
‘Two. “A wild goose passes, lamenting, across the wind-swept sky.” Three. It must be
“The wild goose with a broken wing”. Four. So sad a sound makes “The Heart
Tormented”. Five. “The cry of the wild goose is heard in the land.”’
The others laughed:
‘It certainly makes good sense!’
    Dai-yu picked up a hazel-nut.
‘This cob I take up from the table
Came from a tree, not from a stable.’

The other losers, Faithful and Aroma, were let off more lightly, being required to
produce only a single well-known saying which had some bearing on birthdays. In the
interest of economy their answers are omitted from this narrative.
A brief interlude of confusion followed while the next round of pairings was being
decided. It was resolved that Xiang-yun should play Bao-qin now at guess-fingers and
Li Wan, who had just thrown the same number as Xiu-yan, should play Xiu-yan at
cover-ups. Li Wan was to begin.
‘Gourd,’ said Li Wan.
   ‘Green,’ said Xiu-yan.
‘Green’ was evidently correct, since Li Wan appeared to be satisfied and the two
young women simultaneously sipped their wine.
Meanwhile Xiang-yun had lost to Bao-qin at guess-fingers and was asking what she
should do for a forfeit.
‘You know what Lai Jun-chen said when he showed Zhou Xing the fiery furnace that
Zhou Xing himself had designed,’ said Bao-qin: ‘“Please step inside!” I think that’s
what I should say to you now. Why don’t you do the forfeit that you designed for
Bao-yu?’

The others apart from Xiang-yun appreciated the aptness of the historical allusion.
Xiang-yun began answering without delay.
‘One. “A swift-rushing swirl and shock”. Two. “The sky rocks and heaves in the
river’s swelling waters”. Three. Better have “The lone boat tied with an iron chain”.
Four. And since there is a “Storm on the River”. Five. “This will be a bad day for
travelling.”’
By the time she had finished, the rest of the company were all laughing.
‘That sounded a bit contrived!’ they said. ‘She must have thought the forfeit up for
the express purpose of getting in her joke. - Come on!’ they said to Xiang-yun. ‘Let’s
have the second half.’
From the dish in front of her Xiang-yun picked out a duck’s head with her chopsticks
and pointed it at the maids who were sitting round the fourth table at the other end
of the room.
‘This little duck can’t with those little ducks compare:
This one is quite bald, but they all have a fine head of hair.’
There was even more laughter at this, but the maids pretended to take offence and
Skybright and Periwinkle came over to her table to protest.
‘It’s all very well for Miss Yun to have her joke, but she ought to leave us out of it.
You ought to make her drink another sconce now, as a punishment. And while she’s
about it, she might give us a nice bottle of hair-oil each by way of compensation.’
I dare say she would be glad to,’ said Dai-yu drily. ‘The trouble is that if she starts
giving bottles of hair-oil away, she will probably find herself on the carpet for stealing
them.’
The remark passed unnoticed, with two exceptions. The exceptions were Bao-yu,
who, assuming that it must refer to his supposed theft of the Essence of Roses, held
his head down and said nothing, and Sunset, the real thief, whose face turned red
with embarrassment. Bao-chai stared at Dai-yu reprovingly, whereupon Dai-yu, who
had intended no more than a mild joke at Bao-yu’s expense, realized too late that
Sunset must inevitably have construed it as a spiteful reminder of her guilt. She
attempted to distract attention from it by applying herself, with somewhat unnatural
vigour, to the game of guess-fingers.
The next pairing to be determined by the dice was that of Bao-chai and Bao-yu. The
clue Bao-chai gave Bao-yu for her cover-up was ‘precious’. After puzzling over it for
some moments, Bao-yu felt sure that it was a leg-pull. His own name meant ‘Precious
Jade’. No doubt the object she had in mind was the jade he always wore round his
neck and she was using his own name for her clue. Very well, he would answer her in
kind.
‘I take it that you are making free with my name,’ he said. ‘I hope that you won’t be
offended then if I make just as free with yours. “Bao-chai” means “Precious Hairpin”,
so I shall borrow your “hairpin” for my answer. “Jade hairpin” comes in a line by
some Tang poet:
The candle burnt out and the jade hairpin broken.
It is “jade”, isn’t it, in your cover-up?’
‘I protest,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘“Precious jade” isn’t a quota?tion. You’re supposed to
use only quotations in this game. We ought to sconce them both.’
“‘Precious jade” does come from a quotation,’ said Caltrop.
‘Surely not?’ said Xiang-yun. ‘I’m prepared to admit you might find it on a New Year
scroll or something of that sort, but not in any work of literature, surely?’
‘I came across “precious jade” only the other day in a poem by Cen Shen,’ said
Caltrop:
‘Since in that land much precious jade is found.
I’m surprised you don’t remember it. And not long after?wards I came across
“precious hairpin” in a poem too- a poem by Li Shang-yin:
The precious hairpin gathers dust.
I remember being very much amused at the time to think that Master Bao’s and Miss
Bao’s names are both to be found in poems of the Tang dynasty.’
‘So much for your objection!’ said the others to Xiang-yun, laughing. ‘It’s you who
must drink the sconce.’
It was useless to argue: Xiang-yun had to drink another cupful.
The whole company now paired off for guess-fingers. With Grandmother Jia and Lady
Wang away, the girls felt free to make as much noise as they liked. Coloured sleeves
flashed, bracelets jangled, earrings shook, hair ornaments nodded in time to the
shrieked-out numbers. In such a bedlam almost anything would have passed
unnoticed; and it was only when they had tired of playing and broken off for a rest
that they suddenly became aware that Xiang-yun was no longer with them. At first
they assumed that she must have slipped out to answer a call of nature; but when,
after they had waited for quite some time, she had still not reappeared, they sent
some of the maids out to look for her. The search proved fruitless. Xiang-yun had
vanished without a trace.
At this point Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife arrived, accompanied by several of the old women
under her command. She had come partly out of a genuine desire to be useful but
much more because she regarded the maids as young and giddy creatures who
would take advantage of Lady Wang’s absence to play their young mistresses up by
drinking more than was good for them and behaving riotously. Tan-chun was fully
aware of this and let her know that she was.
‘I see you still don’t trust us, Mrs Lin. I assure you, though, that we haven’t been
drinking very much. We’re only enjoying ourselves: the wine has been a very small
part of it. You really have no cause to be worried.’
Li Wan and You-shi added their reassurances.
‘Go and rest, Lin. We wouldn’t let them drink too much, I promise you.’
The women laughed.
‘I know you wouldn’t,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife. ‘Even when Her Old Ladyship
encourages them to, the young ladies don’t drink very much, so I know they’d be
even less inclined to overdo it when Their Ladyships are away. It wasn’t because of
that I came; it was just that I thought there might be something you needed me for.
Also, as it’s a long way yet to dinner-time and you’ve been at it quite a long while
now, I thought it was time you had a bite of something. I know you don’t normally go
in much for snacks between meals, but when you’ve been drinking, you really need
to get a bit of food inside you so that it does you no harm.’
‘You are quite right,’ said Tan-chun. ‘In fact, we were just thinking of having
something when you came.’
She turned to the maids behind her and told them to fetch some light refreshments
from the kitchen. There was an answering cry from all sides and a few of them went
off to do her bidding.
Tan-chun smiled courteously at the women.
‘Do please go and rest now. Or perhaps you would like to go and keep Mrs Xue
company? We’ll send some wine there presently for you to drink.’
‘Oh no, miss, we wouldn’t presume!’
She and the women stood talking a little longer before finally taking themselves off.
Patience put her hand to her cheek and laughed.
‘My face is so hot, it must be terribly red. I wish they hadn’t seen me like this. I
think we ought to stop now. If we give them an excuse for coming back again it will
be really em?barrassing.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Tan-chun. ‘As long as we don’t do any serious drinking, it’s
perfectly all right.’
‘Come and look, everyone!’ - They were interrupted by a giggling young maid -
‘Miss Yun must have been feeling drunk and gone out for some air. She’s lying on the
granite bench behind the rockery, fast asleep.’
‘Let’s be quiet and not waken her,’ the others said amidst laughter, and followed
her outside to have a look.
They found Xiang-yun where the maid had said, on a large stone bench in a hidden
corner of the rockery, dead to the world. She was covered all over from head to foot
with crimson petals from the peony bushes which grew round about; the fan which
had slipped from her hand and lay on the ground beside her was half buried in petals;
and heaped-up peony petals wrapped in a white silk handkerchief made an
improvised pillow for her head. Over and around this petalled monstro?sity a
convocation of bees and butterflies was hovering distrac?tedly. It was a sight that the
cousins found both touching and comical. They made haste to rouse her and lifted
her up into a half-sitting position on the bench. But Xiang-yun was still playing
drinking games in her sleep and proceeded to recite the words of an imaginary forfeit,
though her eyes were tightly closed.
‘One. “The spring water being sweet, the wine is good.” Two. “Pour me its liquid
amber in a jade cup.” Three. We’ll drink till we see “The moon above the plum-tree
bough”. Four. Then, as we’re “Rolling Home”. Five. It will be “A good time to meet a
friend.”’
They shook her, laughing.
‘Wake up! Wake up! Come and have something to eat. Lying on the damp stone like
this you’ll make yourself ill.’
Xiang-yun...
uplifted slowly then those orbs serene
and saw the faces of the cousins bending over her. Then she looked downwards and
saw her own body and the place where she had been lying. She could remember
escaping from the noise to rest for a few moments somewhere where it was cool and
quiet. Evidently the wine from all those sconces she had been made to drink must
have got the better of her and caused her to drop off. Ashamed to have been
discovered in such a predicament, she struggled hastily to her feet and accompanied
the others back to the summerhouse, where she rinsed her mouth out with water
and drank two very strong cups of tea. Tan-chun made one of the girls fetch a piece
of ‘hangover rock’ for her to suck. By the time she had sucked the rock for a bit and
taken a few mouthfuls of hot, sour soup, she was feeling almost herself again.
A selection was now made of the various comestibles on the tables and sent over to
Xi-feng, who reciprocated by sending them some delicacies of her own. Bao-yu and
the girls then took some sustenance themselves, after which they broke up into little
groups, standing or sitting where they pleased and amusing themselves as the fancy
took them. Some went out?side to admire the peonies or to lean on the balustrade
at the edge of the lake and look at the fish swimming in the water below. Tan-chun
and Bao-qin stayed indoors to play Go. Bao-chai and Xiang-yun stayed indoors to
watch them. Dai-yu and Bao-yu went outside and, having found themselves a little
flowering arbour that they could stand and talk in, appeared to be completely
engrossed in their conversation.
While everyone was thus engaged, Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife and her party appeared once
more, bringing with them a tearful, woebegone woman, who, as they reached the
steps that led up to the summer-house, threw herself down on her knees, not daring
to go further, and began knocking her head upon the ground. Meanwhile Tan-chun
continued to stare concentratedly at the Go-board, one outstretched hand feeling for
the spare pieces in the box while she contemplated her next move. One of her pieces
had been threatened, and though she could see how to get the two ‘eyes’ easily
enough, she could not, however hard she tried, think of a way of doing so which did
not break the development she had planned. It was some minutes before she looked
up and, in turning to ask for some tea, caught sight of Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, who had all
this time been standing there beside her, and asked her what she had come for.
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife pointed to the kneeling woman.
‘This is the mother of Miss Xi-chun’s maid, Landscape. She works in the Garden.
She’s been using some very bad language. I heard her just now and asked her what
she meant by it, but what she said to me, miss - well, I wouldn’t like to soil your ears
by repeating it. I think she ought to be dismissed.’
‘Why didn’t you see Mrs Zhu about this?’ said Tan-chun.
‘I did, miss. I ran into her just now on her way to the jobs room to join Mrs Xue. She
said I was to tell you.’
‘Shouldn’t you tell Mrs Lian?’
‘No need,’ said Patience. ‘I can tell her about it when I get back.’
Tan-chun nodded.
‘All right, dismiss her then. We’ll tell Lady Wang about it when she comes back and
get her to confirm it.’
She turned once more to her game. Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife and her party moved off,
taking the offender with them.
All of this scene was clearly observed by Bao-yu and Dai-yu from their flowering
covert, though they were too far away to hear what was said.
‘What a curiously detached person your sister is!’ said Dai-yu. ‘She has been
actually invited to take charge of things, yet she still won’t go a step beyond what is
absolutely neces?sary. Most people in her position would have been throwing their
weight about long ago.’
‘Ah, you don’t know what’s been going on while you were away,’ said Bao-yu.
‘While you were ill in bed, she did in fact do a great deal of managing. For example,
she divided this Garden into sections and put each section under someone’s
supervision. Nowadays you can’t even pick a flower in it without permission. And she
cut down on a lot of things too- mostly things that Feng or I had asked for, as an
awful example to the others. Oh no, Tan has got very strong views on domes?tic
economy. I certainly wouldn’t call her “detached”.’
‘I’m very glad to hear it,’ said Dai-yu. ‘We are all much too extravagant. Although
the management of the household is not my business, I have frequently, just out of
curiosity, made a few calculations, and I can see that our expenditure is vastly in
excess of our income. If we go on in this way without economizing, the time will
surely come when our credit is ex?hausted.’
‘Even if it does,’ said Bao-yu gaily, ‘I don’t suppose you and I will have to go short.’
Dai-yu turned away from him somewhat impatiently and began walking towards the
summerhouse, intending to seek Bao-chai’s company inside. Bao-yu would have gone
too, but just at that moment Aroma came up carrying a little varnished wooden ‘tea
for two’ tray, in each of whose rounds nestled a cup of freshly made tea.
‘Well, where’s she gone?’ said Aroma. ‘I brought this out specially, because I could
see the two of you standing here all this time without anything to drink; but now
she’s not here.’
‘That’s her, over there,’ said Bao-yu, removing one of the cups for himself. ‘You can
take it to her inside.’
Aroma did so, but by the time she had reached her, Dai-yu was already standing
talking to Bao-chai.
‘Here you are,’ said Aroma, ‘whichever of you is the thirst?ier had better take this
while I go and fetch another.’
‘I’m not thirsty,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I only want enough to wash out my mouth with.’
She lifted the cup to her lips, drank a mouthful of tea from it, and handed the
remainder to Dai-yu.
‘Let me get you another cup,’ said Aroma.
‘Oh, you know me,’ said Dai-yu smilingly. ‘I can’t drink much tea because of my
illness. The doctor says it’s bad for me. This half cup will be quite enough for me.
Thank you very much, though. It’s very kind of you.’
Having drained the cup, she put it back on the tray, where?upon Aroma went off to
collect the other cup from Bao-yu.
‘Where’s Parfumée?’ Bao-yu asked her when she got back to him. ‘I haven’t seen
her for a long time.’
Aroma looked around.
‘She was here a moment ago. I saw her playing match-my?-flower with some of the
others. Now she seems to have dis?appeared.’
Bao-yu hurried back to his room to look for her. He found her asleep on the bed with
her face turned inwards to the wall.
‘Come on, you mustn’t sleep!’ he said. ‘Come out and get some exercise. We’ll be
eating soon. You want to get an appetite for your food.’
‘Why shouldn’t I sleep?’ said Parfumée. ‘There’s nothing else for me to do. I got so
bored when you all went off drinking and left me on my own.’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘We’ll be having a party of our own here in the evening,’ he said, pulling her to her
feet. ‘I’ll ask Aroma to let you sit at table with the rest of us, shall I?’
‘Not on my own,’ said Parfumée. ‘I shouldn’t enjoy it unless Nénuphar and étamine
could be with me as well. Besides, I don’t like noodles. I didn’t have a proper lunch
today because I couldn’t eat the noodles. I got so hungry that just now I asked Liu to
do a bowl of soup and some rice for me to eat here now; so I shan’t want anything
again tonight. I could just drink, I suppose; but if you want me to, you’ll have to let
me drink as much as I like and not let the others fuss over me. When I was still at
home I used to drink two or three catties of rice wine at a sitting, but once I started
learning beastly opera, they wouldn’t let me drink any more in case it spoiled my
voice. During this last year or two I haven’t had so much as a smell of it. Tonight I
should like to celebrate the end of all that.’
‘So you shall,’ said Bao-yu.
At that point a woman arrived from Cook Liu with a food-box containing Parfumée’s
order. Swallow relieved her of it and brought it inside. It contained a bowl of
shrimp-balls in chicken-skin soup, a bowl of duck steamed in wine, a plate of red
salted goose-slices, another plate on which were four cream-cheese rolls stuffed with
pine-kernels, and a large bowl of delicious, steaming-hot, fragrant green rice.
Swallow put these all on the table in front of Parfumée and fetched her a spoon,
chopsticks and some bowls, one of which she filled for her with the fragrant rice.
‘Ugh!’ said Parfumée. ‘How can I eat this horrible greasy stuff?’
She spooned some of the soup onto her rice and picked up a couple of goose-slices
with her chopsticks to put on top of it. The rest she left untouched. Bao-yu sniffed
the rejected dishes. They smelt delicious - much nicer than the things he generally
had to eat. He helped himself to one of the pine-kernel rolls and told Swallow to fill
him another bowl with some rice and pour on some of the soup. The combination
-soup, rice, and pine-roll - was quite delectable. Parfumée and Swallow both laughed
as they watched him eat.
When he and Parfumée had both finished, Swallow would have sent the remainder
back to the kitchen, but Bao-yu told her that she should eat it herself.
‘If it’s not enough, we’ll ask them to bring you some more.’
‘No, no, this will be plenty,’ said Swallow. ‘It’s not long since Musk brought me
some cakes and things from the party. If I eat this now, I shall have had quite enough.’
She proceeded to tuck in there and then, standing where she was beside the table.
Soon all had been demolished except for two pine-kernel rolls.
‘I’ll save these for my Ma,’ she said. ‘Oh, and if you’re drinking this evening, will you
let me have a drop too?’
‘Are you another drinker then?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Good! We’ll have a real celebration
tonight. Aroma and Skybright are both fond of drinking, but they won’t take much as
a rule because they feel it isn’t quite proper. Tonight my birthday shall be the excuse
for everyone to let themselves go! By the way, there’s something I’ve been meaning
to ask you for some time but keep forgetting. Would you make yourself responsible
for Parfumée in future? Just keep an eye on her and see that she doesn’t get up to
mischief. Aroma would like to if she could, but she has her hands full already.’
‘I can look after Parfumée, don’t worry about that,’ said Swallow. ‘What I want to
know is, what are you going to do about Fivey?’
‘You can tell Mrs Liu that Fivey definitely will be coming to work here. After I’ve had
a word with the others, she can move in as soon as she likes.’
‘Now you’re talking!’ said Swallow. She called the two little maids in to wait on him
while he washed his hands and pour out tea for him while she herself got the dirty
things together and handed them to the woman outside. After that she washed her
own hands and went off to tell Cook Liu the good news. But that is no part of our
story.
Bao-yu left to rejoin the others as soon as he was ready, and Parfumée, holding a silk
handkerchief in one hand and a fan in the other, trailed along behind him. As he
came out of the courtyard gate he saw Aroma and Skybright walking hand in hand
towards him and asked them what they had come for.
‘You!’ they said. ‘Dinner’s been laid now and the others are waiting for you to
begin.’
Bao-yu explained that he had just eaten.
Aroma laughed:
‘You’re like a cat: always eating except when you ought to be. You’d better come
and sit with them all the same, for appearance’s sake.’
Skybright poked Parfumee playfully on the forehead with her finger.
‘You’re getting to be quite a little man-eater, aren’t you? Going back to have some
food, indeed! You’d arranged to meet him there, more like. Why didn’t you tell
anyone else that you were going?’
Aroma laughed.
‘Oh nonsense, Skybright! Of course she didn’t arrange to meet him. It was a pure
accident, their being there at the same time together.’
‘All right,’ said Skybright, ‘but what does he need us for then? Why don’t we all go
away and leave Parfumee to look after him on her own?’
‘He may not need the rest of us,’ said Aroma, ‘but he certainly couldn’t do without
you.’
‘On the contrary,’ said Skybright. ‘I’m the one person he could do without. I’m lazy,
I’m clumsy, I’m bad-tempered -in short, I’m just no good for the job.’
‘If he burns another hole in his peacock gold snow-cape, who’s going to mend it for
him if you aren’t there?’ said Aroma mischievously. ‘Yes, my girl: all the excuses I
used to hear from you in the past when I tried to get you to do something for me.
You were no good at sewing, oh no! You didn’t even know how to hold a needle! And
it isn’t as if it was my own sewing I’ve asked you about: it’s only ever been his things
that I’ve asked you to help me with. No, you wouldn’t touch them. Yet I only have to
be out of the house for a few days and there you are, sitting up all night sewing for
him, even though you are half dead with the flu! What can the explanation of that be,
I wonder? No, come on: I want to hear your answer.’
But Skybright only ‘pshaw’-ed and went on smiling.
They had been.walking back to the summerhouse through?out these exchanges and
were now re-entering it. Aunt Xue had come back again for the meal, so they
reseated themselves in order of seniority with Aunt Xue at the head. Bao-yu poured a
little tea onto some rice and merely pretended to share the meal with them. When
they had finished eating, they sat talking over their tea or playing games.
Outside, meanwhile, Periwinkle, Caltrop, Parfumée, étamine, Nénuphar and
Cardamome, having been all over the Garden collecting flowers, sat down, with their
laps full of them, in a little semicircle of lawn enclosed by high banks of flowering
shrubbery and began playing ‘match-my-flower’.
‘I’ve got some Guanyin willow,’ said one.
‘I’ve got some Lohan pine,’ said another.
‘I’ve got gentleman’s bamboo.’
‘I’ve got lady’s plantain.’
‘I’ve got green starwort.’
‘I’ve got red moon-flower.’
‘I’ve got a peony from The Peony Pavilion..’
‘I’ve got a lute-flower from The Story of the Lute.’
‘I’ve got “brothers and sisters”,’ said Cardamome.
‘I’ve got “husbands and wives”,’ said Caltrop.
‘There’s no such flower,’ said Cardamome.
‘Yes there is,’ said Caltrop. ‘There are two main kinds of orchid, the spring orchid,
which has only one flower on each stem, and the summer orchid, which has several;
but there’s more than one kind of summer orchid. There’s the kind that you’ve got,
which has the flowers growing one above the other on the stem: that’s called
“brothers and sisters”; and there’s another kind like mine here, which has two
flowers growing side by side at the top: that’s called a “husband and wife” orchid.’
Cardamome rose to her feet. Unable to counter with botani?cal arguments, she
resorted to jeering instead.
‘And I suppose it’s a “father and son” orchid if one flower’s bigger than the other
and an “enemies” orchid if they’re growing back to back! It’s because your own
husband’s been away so long: you can’t even look at an orchid now with?out thinking
of him. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, dragging him into it like this!’
Caltrop laughed, though her face had turned bright red.
‘You horrible little creature! What rubbish you talk!’
She had begun getting up, intending to give Cardamome’s mouth a good pinch; but
before she could do so, Cardamome had thrown herself upon her, forcing her
backwards and pinning her to the ground, while at the same time she looked round
and called to the other girls to help her.
‘étamine! Nénuphar! Come and pinch her mouth for me!’
Caltrop struggled to get free and the two of them rolled over and over on the ground.
The others laughed and clapped their hands.
‘Careful! Mind the puddle!’ they shouted. ‘Mind she doesn’t spoil her skirt!’
Cardamome looked round and saw that they had rolled towards a hollow in which
rain-water had collected and that Caltrop’s skirt was half in it. Feeling somewhat
scared, she let go of Caltrop, jumped up, and ran away. The others thought Caltrop’s
plight a great joke, but fearing that, with Cardamome gone, she might vent her anger
upon them, they ran off also, amidst peals of laughter.
Caltrop got up and inspected her skirt. It was completely soaked, and the foul,
stagnant water was dripping off it in half-a-dozen places. She was still exclaiming
bitterly over it when Bao-yu appeared. Observing that the girls were playing
match-my-flower, he had gone off to collect some flowers himself and had now come
back to join them. Surprised to find the other girls all gone and Caltrop standing on
her own there contemplating her skirt, he asked her what had happened to the
game.
‘I had a “husbands and wives” flower,’ said Caltrop, ‘but the others had never heard
of it and said I’d made it up; so there was a quarrel and they spoilt my nice new skirt.’
Bao-yu seemed pleased.
‘I can match your “husbands and wives”,’ he said, taking a purple skullcap from his
bunch. ‘Look, here’s a “two heads are better than one”.’ He picked up Caltrop’s orchid
and laid it beside the purple skullcap.
‘Bother your “ two heads are better than one”!’ said Caltrop, ‘and bother my
“husbands and wives”! Look at my skirt!’
Bao-yu bent down and examined it.
‘Aiya! How did you manage to do that? It’s grenadine, isn’t it, that red material?
They call it that because it’s the red of pomegranate-flowers. I’m afraid it’s a material
that stains very badly. What a pity!’
‘It was material that Miss Bao-qin brought with her from Nanking,’ said Caltrop.
‘Miss Bao-chai and I each made ourselves a skirt out of it. This is the first time I’ve
put mine on.’
Bao-yu stamped and sighed sympathetically.
‘I’m sure the Xues could afford to spoil a hundred skirts like this one every day,’ he
said; ‘but that’s not the point. In the first place, if this is material that Bao-qin gave
you, it’s going to look rather bad if your skirt’s worn out before Bao?- chai’s has even
been worn. And in the second place, Aunt Xue is a bit inclined to nag - I’ve often
heard her complain?ing that you are extravagant and a bad manager and don’t know
how to look after things properly and so forth - and though this may not be your fault,
I’m afraid if she gets to see it, you are going to have rather a lot of that sort of thing
to listen to.’
What Bao-yu had just said so exactly accorded with what Caltrop herself had been
thinking, that she began, in spite of everything, to feel almost pleased.
‘I know. If only I’d got another skirt like this one, I could change into it straight away
and she wouldn’t notice. But the trouble is, though I’ve got several new skirts, they
all look quite different.’
‘Stop moving!’ said Bao-yu. ‘If you don’t keep still, you’ll get the dirty water on your
trousers and pantaloons and the tops of your shoes. I’ve got an idea. Last month
Aroma made herself a skirt which is practically identical with this one, but she won’t
be able to wear it for a while yet because she’s still in mourning for her mother. Why
don’t we get her to send it over for you to change into?’
Caltrop smiled gratefully but shook her head.
‘No, I can’t do that. I’m sure they wouldn’t like it if they found out.’
‘They won’t mind,’ said Bao-yu. ‘As soon as her mourning’s over you can ask her
what she’d like to have in return and I’m sure they’d be only too pleased to let you
give it to her. Come now, it’s not like you to be so coy! It’s not as if you’ll be doing
anything deceitful. You can tell Bao-chai about it. All we shall be doing is making sure
that my aunt doesn’t get to hear of it, because we know it would only make her
angry.’
Caltrop thought for a bit. What he said seemed reasonable. She smiled and nodded.
‘All right- since you are so kind. I’ll wait for you here, then. Only please, I beg of you,
ask her to bring it here herself.’
Bao-yu agreed, delighted that she had accepted, and hurried back to find Aroma,
head low and eyes to the ground, think?ing about Caltrop all the way.
‘What a pity - nice girl like that - hasn’t any parents -doesn’t even remember her
own name - kidnapped when she was a child - and to be sold to a brute like Pan!’
But not all his thoughts about her were so melancholy.
‘What a delightful surprise, though, to be able to do this for her! - That time with
Patience was a surprise, too. But this! - never, never would have expected it!’
Still engrossed in these thoughts, he regained his room. There, going up to Aroma, he
took her impulsively by the hand and told her what he had come for.
Everyone loved Caltrop. There was something endearing about her that one could
not help responding to. Aroma was no exception and was in any case somewhat
given to acts of impulsive generosity. As soon as Bao-yu told her what had happened,
she opened her clothes-chest, and getting the scarlet skirt out, folded it up carefully
and hurried off after him to look for her.
They found her still standing patiently on the spot where Bao-yu had left her. Aroma
pretended to scold.
‘You’re too wild, Caltrop. It always ends in trouble.’
   Caltrop coloured.
‘Oh, thank you, Aroma. It’s those horrible little beasts I was playing with. I didn’t
realize they could be so nasty.’
She unfolded the skirt that Aroma had brought her. It was, as Bao-yu had said, exactly
like the one she was wearing. She made him turn his back and look away while she
crossed her arms and inserted her hands under her dress in order to undo the
fastenings of the dirty skirt. Having carefully removed it, she wrapped herself in the
clean one and did up the sides.
‘Let me take that dirty one,’ said Aroma. ‘I’ll send it back to you later when I’ve
cleaned it up a bit. If they were to see you going back with it, they’d be sure to ask
questions.’
‘Yes, you take it,’ said Caltrop. ‘But my dear Aroma, I don’t want it back if I’ve got
this one of yours to wear. Give it to one of the younger maids. I don’t mind which one:
you can decide that for me.’
‘That’s very generous of you,’ said Aroma.
Caltrop bowed twice to her in formal expression of her thanks. Aroma then went off,
carrying the dirty skirt.
Looking round for Bao-yu, Caltrop found him still with his back towards her, squatting
down on the ground and just completing the burial of the ‘husband and wife’ orchid
and the purple skullcap. He had dug a little grave for them with a piece of stick, lined
it with fallen petals, laid the two flowers on the petals, covered them with more
petals, and was now smoothing earth over the top. Caltrop tugged at his arm,
laughing.
‘What on earth do you think you’re doing? I’ve heard people talking about the
creepy sort of things you get up to, but I only now realize what they mean. Look at
your hands! They’re absolutely filthy. You’d better go and wash them straight away.’
Bao-yu got up and began to go. Caltrop started walking off, too, in the opposite
direction. She had gone no more than a few steps, however, when she turned and
called to him to stop. Bao-yu, supposing that she had something more to say to him,
turned smilingly towards her, holding up his muddy bands.
‘What is it?’
But Caltrop merely stood there, smiling and saying nothing. Just then her little maid
Advent came up to tell her that Bao-qin wanted to talk to her. After that, finally, she
spoke.
‘You won’t ever tell your Cousin Pan about this, will you?’
‘What, put my head inside the mouth of a tiger?’ said Bao-?yu, laughing. ‘You must
think I’m crazy!’
He turned once more and went back to Green Delights.
What happened there will be related in the next chapter.
CHAPTER 63

Flower maidens combine for
nocturnal birthday revels
And a grass widow copes with funeral arrangements
single-handed



The first thing Bao-yu did when he got back to Green Delights was to wash his hands.
While doing so, he discussed with Aroma the drinking-party that they were planning
to have that evening.
‘I want everyone to enjoy themselves,’ he said. ‘I want you to let yourselves go for
once. Let’s decide now what we are going to eat, so that they have plenty of time to
get it ready.’
‘You don’t have to worry about that,’ said Aroma, smiling. ‘I’ve already made a
collection for tonight and given the money to Mrs Liu: ten pennyweights of silver
each from Skybright, Musk, Ripple and me - that’s two taels - and six each from
Parfumée, Emerald, Swallow and Number Four (I didn’t collect anything from the
ones who are taking the evening off) making three taels four pennyweights
altogether. With that money she’s going to do us forty little dishes of different things
to eat. I’ve also had a word with Patience about the drink and she’s had a two-gallon
jar of Shaoxing wine carried over for us. It’s hidden away over there, ready for the
evening. The party will be our birthday present to you from the eight of us.’
‘How did the younger ones manage to give so much?’ said Bao-yu, pleased but a
little concerned. ‘I think it would have been better if you hadn’t taken contributions
from them.’
‘What about us then?’ said Skybright. ‘We’re not exactly rich. This is something
they wanted to do for you. I think you ought to accept it in the spirit in which it was
offered and not bother too much about where the money came from. Suppose they
stole it: what does that matter to you?’
‘You’re right,’ said Bao-yu, laughing.
‘If you were to go for one single day without feeling the rough side of her tongue,’
said Aroma, ‘I think you would feel deprived!’
‘Aroma is getting quite expert in the art of stirring up trouble between other
people,’ said Skybright. ‘I wonder who she picked it up from.’
While the others were still laughing at these exchanges, Bao-yu gave orders for them
to close the courtyard gate.
‘I don’t wonder the young ladies call you “Busybody”,’ said Aroma. ‘If we shut the
gate now, we shall be simply inviting suspicion. Much better wait a bit.’
Bao-yu nodded.
‘I have to go outside now for a moment. Have some water ready when I get back,
will you, Number Four? Swallow, you can come with me.’
When they were outside and he had first made sure that no one else was about, he
asked Swallow what Cook Liu had said about Fivey.
‘Mrs Liu was very pleased when I told her,’ said Swallow, ‘but she said that because
of all the worry and the harsh treatment she suffered the other night Fivey has had a
relapse; so it’s out of the question for her to begin working with us now. She said it
will just have to wait until she’s better.’
Judging from the long sigh he gave when he heard this, Bao-yu appeared to be very
much distressed.
‘Tell me,’ he asked, ‘does Aroma know about this?’
‘I haven’t told her myself,’ said Swallow. ‘I suppose Parfumée might have done.’
‘Anyway, I haven’t told her yet,’ he said. ‘Hmn. Perhaps I’d better.’
Going back inside, he was careful to wash his hands to avert suspicion.
It was already lighting-up time. A party of women could be heard entering the
courtyard gate. The inmates of Green Delights crowded to the windows to peep out.
It was Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, accompanied by a number of the stewardesses. A woman
holding a big lantern in her hand was leading the way.
‘They’ve come to inspect the watch,’ said Skybright. ‘When they go out again we
shall be able to shut the gate.’
Sure enough, the women on night-duty at Green Delights now trooped out into the
courtyard to be inspected.
‘Now, no gambling and no drinking!’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, when she had
ascertained that they were all there. ‘And no lying down and going to sleep until
daylight, or I shall be after you!’
‘None of us is that stupid,’ said the women, laughing. ‘We wouldn’t dare.’
‘Is Master Bao in bed yet?’ Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife asked them.
The women said they didn’t know. Aroma gave Bao-yu a prod and he shuffled to the
doorway in his slippers and smiled amiably at the assembled matrons outside.
‘I haven’t gone to bed yet. Come inside and sit down.’ He turned to Aroma inside.
‘Aroma, some tea for Mrs Lin!’
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife required no pressing.
‘Not in bed yet?’ she exclaimed, stepping nimbly into the room. ‘Now that the days
are so long, you need to go to bed early so that you can get up early in the morning.
If you get up late, people will laugh at you. “That’s no way for an educated,
well-brought-up young gentleman to behave,” they’ll say. “More like an ignorant,
uneducated coolie.”‘
The comparison seemed to please her, for she laughed very complacently after
making it. Bao-yu laughed too.
‘You’re quite right, Mrs Lin. As a matter of fact, I do go to bed early most nights.
Generally when you make your rounds I don’t know you’ve been here because I’m
already in bed when you come. The reason I’ve stayed up today is be?cause I’ve had
such a lot of noodles to eat. I was afraid that if I went to bed now I’d get indigestion.’
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife transferred her smiling attention to Aroma.
‘You want to give him some good, strong Pu-er tea to drink.’
Aroma and Skybright answered her together.
‘We made him a big pot of herbal tea - wutong-tips. He’s already had two cupfuls of
it. It’s still quite fresh. Would you like to try some?’
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife rose to receive the cup that Skybright poured for her.
‘I hear that Master Bao has taken to calling you senior girls by your names,’ she said.
‘Now that’s not very respectful. Though you work here, you are still Their Ladyships’
girls, don’t forget. I don’t say but what he mightn’t sometimes, just once in a while,
let one of your names drop out by accident, and no harm done. But if he makes a
habit of it, the other young gentlemen will soon be copying him, and we shall get
ourselves laughed at as a family in which the young folk have no respect for their
elders.’
‘You are quite right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘But in fact it is only once in a while and quite
unintentionally.’
Aroma and Skybright hastened to corroborate this.
‘Oh yes, Mrs Lin. It would be quite unfair to say that he makes a habit of it.
Normally he is most respectful. It’s only once or twice in this apartment when we’ve
been joking together and never in front of other people.’
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife was all smiles.
‘Well, that’s all right then. Respectable is what an educated young gentleman ought
to be. The more you respect others, I say, the more others will respect you. And I
don’t only mean older people who have served three or four generations of the
family, I mean anyone who comes to you from Their Ladyships. Even Their Ladyships’
cat and Their Ladyships’ dog is to be respected, if you want people to think of you as
an edu?cated, well-brought-up young gentleman.’
She finished her tea.
‘Well, good night young master, I must be going.’
‘Won’t you stay a little longer?’ said Bao-yu.
But Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife was already on her way and leading her troops off to inspect
another apartment. Skybright barred the gate after her as soon as she was gone. She
was laughing as she came in afterwards.
‘I think the old girl’s had a bit too much to drink. That’s why we were treated to the
lecture.’
‘She means well,’ said Musk. ‘We need someone to remind us once in a while, just
to keep us on the straight and narrow.’
She began laying the table while she said this; but Aroma stopped her.
‘Let’s not sit up at the big table. We can put the round pear-wood table on the kang.
It will be much more relaxed and comfortable on the kang.’
While other maids lifted the pear-wood table onto the kang, Musk and Number Four
went off to collect the dishes that Cook Liu had been preparing for them. Though
each carried the largest tea-tray she could find, it took four or five trips to carry them
all over. Meanwhile two old nannies squatted on the verandah outside, tending the
stove on which the wine was heating.
‘It’s so hot,’ Bao-yu said to the maids. ‘Let’s take our outer clothes off.’
‘You can take yours off if you like,’ said the girls, ‘but we want to drink a health with
you before we start, so we shall have to stay respectable a bit longer.’
‘If you’re going to begin that sort of nonsense, we shan’t get started until morning!’
said Bao-yu. ‘You know how I hate that kind of thing. It’s bad enough at parties
outside when I have to do it; but to make me do it here in my own room it’s as
though you were deliberately trying to annoy me.’
‘All right, all right!’ they said. ‘Anything you say!’
And so, before taking their places on the kang, they went off to remove their
hair-ornaments and make themselves more comfortable. They returned wearing only
tunics and trousers, with their unadorned hair loosely knotted or coiled. Bao-yu
himself was wearing a dark-red cotton tunic tied at the waist with a sash, and
trousers in a black-and-green-patterned lined silk gauze, unconfined at the ankles.
The girls found him already ensconced on the kang. He was leaning back, one elbow
resting on a newly-made turquoise-coloured pouffe stuffed with rose and peony
petals, playing guess-fingers with Parfumée. Parfumée was shouting excitedly as she
played. She was wearing a very short, close-fitting tunic with a harlequin pattern of
turquoise, deep purple and reddish-brown lozen?ges, a willow-green sash, and
flower-sprigged pale red trousers, which, like Bao-yu’s, were unconfined at the ankles.
Her hair was done up in a number of little plaits which had been drawn back to join
one great plait, as thick as a goose’s egg at the nape of her neck. She had a tiny jade
stud no bigger than a grain of rice in her right ear; from her left ear hung a pendant
made of ruby-glass and gold, the size of a ginkgo-fruit. Never had the moonlike pallor
of her face, the limpid brightness of her eyes shown to greater advantage.
‘Look at that now!’ said the maids admiringly. ‘Wouldn’t you take the two of them
for a pair of twins?’
‘Wait a bit,’ said Aroma, who had begun pouring wine. ‘You can play that later. Even
though you won’t let us drink healths with you, at least do us the honour of drinking
from our hands.’
She held her wine-cup to his lips and he took a sip from it. After that each of the
seven others came up to him in turn, holding their full cups out to him, and he took a
sip from each one. This little ceremony over, they proceeded to arrange themselves
round the table. As there was insufficient room for Swallow and Number Four on the
side nearest the edge of the kang, they brought a couple of felt-covered porcelain
‘tabouret’ stools up and sat at it on the floor below. The forty dishes, all of white
Ding-ware and each no larger than a tea-saucer, contained every conceivable kind of
sweet, savoury, fresh, dried, pickled, salted, smoked, baked, fried or sauteed delicacy
designed to assist the absorption of rice-wine by the human frame.
‘Let’s play a drinking game,’ said Bao-yu.
‘Yes, but let it be a nice, quiet game this time,’ said Aroma. ‘We don’t want too
much shouting, or people will hear us. Something not too learned, though. Don’t
forget that some of us here can’t read or write.’
‘Get out the dice and let’s play Fours then,’ said Musk.
‘No, that’s a boring game,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Let’s play Choos?ing the Flower.’
‘Oh yes, do let’s!’ said Skybright. ‘I’ve been wanting to play that for ages.’
‘It’s a good game,’ said Aroma, ‘but you really need more people playing it to make
it interesting.’
‘If you ask me, I think we should slip over and ask Miss Bao and Miss Yun and Miss
Lin to come and join us,’ said Swallow. ‘There’d be no harm in their staying here till
about ten o’clock, surely?’
‘But think of all the opening and closing of gates,’ said Aroma. And suppose you ran
into the watch and they started asking -’
‘It’ll be all right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Ask Miss Tan too; she’s fond of drinking. And if she’s
one of the party, they won’t be able to say anything even if they do find out. And
what about Miss Qin?’
‘No, not Miss Qin,’ said the girls. ‘She’s staying in Mrs Zhu’s room. Routing her out
from there would be simply asking for trouble.’
‘It’ll be all right,’ said Bao-yu, ‘you see. Just ask her.’
Swallow and Number Four needed no second bidding. Choosing a few of the junior
maids to go with them, they ordered the old women to open the gate for them and
set off, one in the direction of Dai-yu’s place and one in the direction of Bao-chai’s.
The senior maids, Aroma, Musk and Skybright, doubted whether, particularly in the
case of Dai-yu and Bao-chai, such insubstantial deputies would be successful and
decided that they had better go themselves and add their own weight to the
invitation. Ordering a couple of the older women with lanterns to accompany them,
they went off in the wake of the other two to see what they could achieve.
It was as they had suspected. Bao-chai ‘thought it was rather late’; Dai-yu ‘didn’t feel
quite up to it’. It was only when Aroma and Skybright had appealed to them by
pointing out that the maids were the hosts and would very much appreciate the
honour that they changed their minds and finally consented to come.
Swallow and Number Four had had no such difficulty with Tan-chun. She had seemed
delighted by the invitation, even suggesting that they should invite Li Wan as well
since it would be embarrassing if she were not invited and were to find out about the
party afterwards - and sending her own maid Ebony to help Swallow persuade Li Wan
that she and Bao-qin should come.
One by one the new guests started to arrive. Caltrop came, too, in addition to the
ones already mentioned. Refusing to take ‘no’ for an answer, Aroma had taken her
firmly by the hand and dragged her off forcibly from All-spice Court. To
accommodate the greater numbers, Aroma and the other girls put another table
alongside the one already on the kang and a row of chairs facing them on the floor
below. Bao-yu and the other guests arranged themselves on the kang, while the
seven maids and Parfumée, as hosts, sat on the row of chairs below, within reach of
one or other of the tables.
‘Cousin Lin can sit there, against the partition,’ said Bao-yu, while the guests were
still arranging themselves on the kang. ‘She’ll be better able to keep warm there.’
He made her a little nest of pillows there, into which, though it was somewhat
inconveniently distant from the table, she settled herself very comfortably. From this
cosy vantage-point she looked across at Li Wan, Bao-chai and Tan-chun with a teasing
smile.
‘You are always grumbling about the gambling and drinking of the servants, yet
here are we proposing to do precisely the same thing ourselves. How will you have
the face to tell them off for this sort of thing in future?’
‘This doesn’t count,’ said Li Wan, smiling back at her. ‘There’s all the difference in
the world between doing this once in a while on a birthday or a holiday and doing it
every night of one’s life.’
Skybright now produced a cylindrical bamboo box containing a set of ivory
drinking-cards, each with a different kind of flower painted on it. After giving it a
good shake, she put it down in the middle of one of the tables. Then she took four
dice, put them inside a dice-box, shook it, opened it, and looked inside. The pips on
the faces uppermost made a total of five. Counting herself as ‘one’, the fifth along in
an anti-clockwise direction was Bao-chai.
‘I draw first then,’ said Bao-chai, smiling. ‘I wonder what it will be.’
She gave the cylinder another shake and pulled out a card. The others craned over to
look. It had a picture of a peony on it with the caption ‘Empress of the Garden’ in
large red characters. This was followed by a line of smaller black characters from a
poem by the Tang poet Luo Yin:
Yourself lack passion, yet can others move.
On the other side of the picture were directions for the person drawing the card and
for the other drinkers:
All present are to drink a cup in your honour. Also,
because you have preeminence over all the other flowers,
you are entitled to ask anyone present to recite a poem
or tell a joke or sing a song for your entertainment.
     The others laughed delightedly.
     ‘The peony suits you perfectly. What a splendid choice!’
When they had all drunk the cupful, Bao-chai drank a little wine herself and said that
she would like Parfumée to sing her a song. Parfumée began:
‘The sumptuous birthday feast begins -’
‘Stop! Stop!’ said the others. ‘We don’t want birthday odes at this time of night.
Sing us something nice.’
Parfumée began again, this time putting all she had into the performance:
‘With my little phoenix-feather broom
I stand at heaven’s door
To sweep away the fallen flowers
That lie on heaven’s floor;
And when, by yonder cloud-bank,
The wind begins to rise,
It stirs the pearly dust up:
Round and round it flies.
O, sweeping heaven’s floor
Is like any earthly chore! ...’

Meanwhile Bao-yu, who had taken temporary possession of the card, continued to
turn it this way and that between his fingers, muttering to himself the line of verse
that was inscribed on it:
Yourself lack passion, yet can others move.
When Parfumée had finished, he gazed at her fixedly, saying nothing. Xiang-yun
snatched the card from him rather im?patiently and handed it back to Bao-chai.
Bao-chai threw the dice. Sixteen. This time the count went right round both tables,
ending at Tan-chun, who was sitting next to her.
‘I wonder what I shall be,’ said Tan-chun, and reached out to draw a card. But she
blushed when she had looked at it and threw it on the table with an embarrassed
laugh.
‘I don’t think we ought to play this game,’ she said. ‘It’s really a game for men to
play, outside. There are all sorts of objectionable things in the directions.’
The others were puzzled, until Aroma picked the card up and held it out for them to
see. The picture was of a spray of almond blossom with the caption ‘Spirit of the
Afterglow’. The line of verse which followed it was by Gao Chan:
Apricot-trees make the sun’s red-petalled floor.
Then came the part which had made Tan-chun feel embarrassed:
You are destined to make a noble marriage. Congratulations! Those present must
  offer you a cup of wine and drink a cup in your honour.
The reading of these words was greeted with general laughter.
‘So that’s what upset you? Well, it’s true there are a few like this which are amusing
at the expense of us girls, but there’s no real harm in them. Anyway, what’s wrong
with the prognostication? We’ve already got one royal consort in the family, why
shouldn’t we have another? Congratulations!’
They raised their cups and drank a toast to the marriage. Tan-chun herself refused to
drink, but Xiang-yun, Caltrop and Li Wan seized hold of her and forced the wine down
her throat. Even then she continued to insist that they ought to abandon the game
and play something else. Xiang-yun had to take hold of her hand, clamp her fingers to
the dice-box, and force her to throw the dice. The number thrown in this way was
nineteen. This time the count was more than the number of players and ended, the
second time round, at Li Wan. Li Wan shook the cylinder and drew out a card. She
smiled when she saw what she had got.
‘Very good! Look at this, all of you! This is rather a nice one.’
The picture was of a winter-flowering plum with the rubric ‘Beauty of the Snow’. The
verse that followed was by Wang Qi:
Content by cottage fence to bloom unseen.
The instructions given on this card were:
You are to drink a cup of wine. The next player after you is to throw the dice.
‘There, isn’t that nice!’ said Li Wan. ‘You have to throw the dice for me and I just sit
back enjoying myself and let the world go by!’
She sipped her wine and passed the dice-box to Dai-yu. The eighteen which Dai-yu
threw brought the count round to Xiang-yun.
‘Ha ha!’ said Xiang-yun, rolling up her sleeves. She stretched her arm out and drew
a card. The others looked at what she had drawn. It was a picture of crab-apple
blossom with the caption ‘Sweet Drunken Dreamer’. The quotation following was a
line from Su Dong-po:
Fear that the flowers at dead of night should sleep.
‘For “at dead of night” read “on a stone bench”,’ said Dai-yu.
The others laughed, remembering Xiang-yun’s inebriation earlier in the day; but
Xiang-yun smiled unconcernedly and pointed to the self-propelling toy boat on
Bao-yu’s shelf.
‘Just get on that boat and go home, will you? You have too much to say for yourself,
my girl!’
Amidst further laughter they looked at the instructions:
          In view of the sweet drunken dreaming you are not to drink anything
yourself,
but the players sitting to right and left of you are each to drink a cupful.
‘Holy name!’ said Xiang-yun, clapping her hands delight?edly. ‘What a kind,
thoughtful card!’
Xiang-yun’s neighbours, it so happened, were Dai-yu and Bao-yu. Others filled their
cups for them in readiness. Bao-yu drank half of his and gave the rest to Parfumee,
who threw her head back and emptied it at a gulp; Dai-yu, under cover of talking to
someone, emptied the whole of hers into a spittoon. Xiang-yun picked up the dice.
The total this time was nine, which meant that Musk was to draw. The card she drew
portrayed a rose under the caption ‘Summer’s Crowning Glory’. The black-letter verse
was another line from Wang Qi:
After sweet Rose there is no more blooming.
And the instructions:
All present drink three cups to commemorate the passing of the flowers.
      ‘What does it say?’ Musk asked.
Bao-yu frowned and quickly hid the card.
‘We are all to drink something,’ he said.
As a compromise they drank three sips each instead of the three cupfuls prescribed.
Musk threw nineteen with the dice, which made it Caltrop’s turn to draw. The flower
she drew was a purple skullcap with the caption ‘Three Springs’ Harbinger’. The line
of verse was by Zhu Shu-zhen:
Even as the twy-stemmed blossoms break in bloom.
And the comment:
This flower is a luck-bringer. Congratulations! Those present are to offer
you three cups of wine and are each to drink a cup of wine to your health.
     Caltrop threw six. Dai-yu to draw.
‘I wonder if there are any nice ones left,’ Dai-yu thought as she reached out to draw
a card. ‘I hope I shall pick one of them if there are.’
She looked at the card she had taken. It was a hibiscus flower. ‘Mourner of the
Autumn Mere’ the caption said, and the line of verse was by Ou-yang Xiu:
Your own self, not the East Wind, is your undoing.
The instructions said:
You are to drink a cup of wine yourself, and Peony is to take a cup with you.
     The others laughed.
     ‘Isn’t that good! It’s exactly the right flower for her.’
     Dai-yu too seemed pleased. When she and Bao-chai had drunk, she threw the
dice. Twenty. That meant that Aroma was to draw. Aroma reached out and took a
card. The picture on it was of a spray of peach-blossom with the caption ‘Fisherman’s
Lost Paradise’ and the verse, from Xie Fang-de:
Peach-trees in pink and another spring is here.
The instructions said:
Almond is to drink a cup of wine with you, so is anyone who is the same age as you,
anyone whose birthday is on the same day, and anyone who has the same surname.
     ‘This one sounds interesting,’ said the others, laughing, and at once began
working out which of them belonged to these categories. Caltrop, Skybright and
Bao-chai were all the same age as Aroma; Dai-yu’s birthday was on the same day; but
there appeared to be no one present with the same surname – until Parfumée
pointed out that her surname, like Aroma’s, was ‘Hua’ and claimed the right to drink
a cup as well.
     While the others were pouring out the wine, Dai-yu looked mischievously at
Tan-chun:
      ‘As both Almond and someone who is destined to marry royalty, you had better
begin.’
      ‘What’s that?’ said Tan-chun. She turned to Li Wan. ‘Oblige me by leaning over
and giving that girl a back-hander, would you?’
      ‘Oh, that seems rather hard!’ said Li Wan. ‘She’s not getting a royal husband and
now she is to be beaten as well!’
      Aroma was about to throw the dice when they heard someone calling outside
the gate. One of the old women hurried out to see who it was and came back to
tell them that it was some people from Aunt Xue’s come to collect Dai-yu.
      ‘What time is it?’ they asked the old woman.
      ‘Long past second watch,’ she said. ‘It struck eleven some time ago.’
      Bao-yu, refusing to believe that it could be so late, asked to see his watch. He
found on inspecting it, however, that it was in fact five and twenty minutes past
eleven. Dai-yu rose to her feet.
      ‘I can’t, in any case, keep going much longer,’ she said. ‘And I have to take my
medicine when I get back.’
      ‘Perhaps we’d all better break off now,’ said the others.
      Aroma and Bao-yu tried to dissuade them, but Li Wan and Tan-chun were
insistent.
‘It’s terribly late. We’ve already broken enough rules for one day.’
‘Very well,’ said Aroma. ‘All of you lust drink one more cup of wine then, and we’ll
let you go.’
Skybright, assisted by one of the junior maids, was already filling their cups. The
others drank up and called for their lanterns to be lit. When they were ready, Aroma
and the rest of the maids accompanied them all the way to the far side of Drenched
Blossoms Bridge before returning to Green Delights. There, having once more barred
the gate, they continued for a while with the game. Aroma filled some extra large
cups with wine and put a selection of the delicacies on the little dishes on to a large
plate to give to the old women who had been all this time on duty.
Everyone was by now beginning to be a little drunk. Soon they were playing
guess-fingers and singing solos. By two o’clock the old women, who had been
supplementing what the maids, in their kindness, had given them by surreptitiously
helping themselves, had made such formidable inroads into the wine-supply that the
two-gallon jar was suddenly found to be empty. On hearing that there was no more
wine, the maids began to clear the things away and to wash and prepare themselves
for bed.
Parfumée, who had drunk so much that her cheeks were flushed and her eyes
glittered with an unnatural brightness, was incapable of moving. She leaned inertly
against Aroma’s shoulder, murmuring plaintively in her ear.
‘Oh, Aroma! My heart is beating so!’
Aroma laughed.
     ‘You shouldn’t have drunk so much!’
Swallow and Number Four had long since succumbed and were lying asleep on the
kang. Skybright tried unsuccessfully to wake them; but Bao-yu stopped her:
‘Leave them alone. It doesn’t matter if we all sleep here for once.’
He followed their example by pillowing his head on the petal-stuffed damask cushion,
turning over on his side, and promptly dropping off to sleep.
     Aroma could see that Parfumée was extremely drunk. Fearing that any but the
slightest movement might make her sick, she lifted her up, very, very gently, and laid
her down beside Bao-yu on the kang. She herself lay down on the couch opposite. A
gentle oblivion then descended upon all of them and they slept like tops until
morning.
     It was already broad daylight when Aroma opened her eyes.
     ‘Oh, it’s late!’ she said.
     She raised her head up to look at the kang opposite. Parfumée was still fast
asleep, her head resting on the raised edge of the kang. Aroma hurriedly got up and
went across to wake her. Her calling aroused Bao-yu, who sat up, looked around him
cheerfully, commented ‘It’s late!’, and gave Parfumée a prod. Then Parfumée, too, sat
up, rubbing her eyes and still only half awake.
     ‘Shame on you!’ said Aroma, laughing at her. ‘Look where you spent last night!
You must have been very drunk, not to have chosen your place more carefully!’
     Parfumée looked around her and saw that she had spent the night at Bao-yu’s
side. She slipped off the kang hurriedly, with an embarrassed laugh.
      ‘How did I …?’
      ‘I don’t know either,’ said Bao-yu, laughing. ‘If I had known, I should have
rubbed some ink on your face!’
      Maids now came in carrying the basin and other things for his toilet.
      ‘Thank you all very much for last night’s party,’ said Bao-yu. ‘We’ll have another
one tonight and this time you shall all be my guests.’
      ‘Oh, no!’ said Aroma. ‘Not again! If we make another rumpus tonight, people
will start complaining.’
      ‘That’s all right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s only twice. Anyway, we’re all seasoned
drinkers. Just think, we got through a whole two-gallon jar of wine last night! Just
as it was beginning to get interesting, we found that we’d run out.’
      ‘That’s how it should be,’ said Aroma. ‘It’s much better to end a party when the
fun is at its height than to go on until everyone is exhausted. I must say, everyone
was in very good form last night. Skybright was being quite abandoned. She even
sang a song, if I remember rightly!’
‘But don’t you remember?’ said Number Four. ‘You sang one too. We all did.’
A fit of uncontrollable giggles possessed the maids as they remembered, and they hid
their blushing faces in their hands. While they were still giggling, a smiling Patience
arrived. She had come to invite her hosts of the previous day to a return party.
‘No excuses!’ she said. ‘I shall expect every one of you to be there.’
They made her sit down and somebody fetched her some tea.
‘What a pity we didn’t have her with us last night!’ Skybright commented.
Patience pricked up her ears.
‘Why, what were you doing last night?’
‘I don’t know whether I ought to tell you,’ said Aroma. ‘We had a high old time, I
can tell you that. Even the high jinks Her Old Ladyship gets up to with the young
ladies and Master Bao are nothing compared to last night. We got through a whole
two-gallon jar of wine. We drank so much that we forgot our shame, singing songs
until after two o’clock, then lying around with our clothes on and sleeping where we
lay until morning.’
‘Charming!’ said Patience with pretended indignation. ‘You come and ask me for
wine, you don’t invite me to your party, and now you have the nerve to tell me what
a wonderful time you had. I feel really angry!’
‘He’s giving a return party tonight,’ said Skybright. ‘He’s sure to ask you to that. I
expect he’ll be going over himself shortly to invite you.’
‘“He” is who? Who is “he”?’ said Patience.
‘Oh, sharp-ears!’ Skybright coloured and pretended to strike her. ‘Trust you to pick
on a little thing like that!’
‘Well, I can’t stay here talking, I’ve got something to attend to,’ said Patience. ‘I’ll be
sending someone over later to tell you when it’s ready. Mind you all come now, or I’ll
have the troops out to come and get you!’
Bao-yu and the maids tried to detain her, but she was already on her way.
Bao-yu now completed his interrupted toilet and took his early morning tea. While
he sat sipping it, his eye chanced to light on a sheet of paper underneath the
inkstone.
‘I wish you girls wouldn’t use my inkstone as a paper?weight,’ he said.
Aroma and Skybright were immediately on the defensive.
‘Oh dear! Who’s at fault this time?’
Bao-yu pointed towards the offending paper.
‘Look. Under the inkstone. Someone’s pattern, I expect, that she forgot to put
away.’
Skybright lifted the inkstone and picked up the paper from underneath. It was not an
embroidery-pattern but some kind of writing. She handed it to Bao-yu. It was a sheet
of pink, patterned letter-paper. A single column of characters ran down the centre of
it:
From Adamantina, the Dweller Beyond the Threshold: Respect?ful Anniversary
Greetings.
‘Who took delivery of this note?’ he asked, jumping up excitedly.
Assuming, from the degree of agitation, that the note must be from a person of some
consequence, Aroma and Skybright took up the question. In response to their
shouted inquiry, a smiling Number Four came running into the room.
‘I did. From Adamantina. She didn’t bring it herself, she sent one of the old women
with it. I put it down somewhere in here. I meant to tell you about it, but with all that
drinking last night I forgot.’
‘So that’s who it’s from,’ said the other maids. ‘What a fuss about nothing!’
But Bao-yu evidently did not think so.
‘Fetch me some paper,’ he said, still in some agitation, and himself began grinding
the ink. But when the ink was ground and he sat with moistened brush poised in
readiness over the virgin paper, he found that he did not know how to begin. What
was the correct response to ‘Dweller Beyond the Threshold’? For a long time he sat
thinking, but no inspira?tion was forthcoming.
‘It’s no good asking Bao-chai,’ he thought. ‘She’d only say something critical about
Adamantina being too “fanciful”. I’d better ask Dai-yu.’
Slipping Adamantina’s note into his sleeve, he set off in the direction of the Naiad’s
House. He was just stepping off the Drenched Blossoms bridge when he caught sight
of Xing Xiu-yan bustling along in a very purposeful manner from the opposite
direction.
‘Where are you going?’ he asked her.
‘I want to have a talk with Adamantina.’
Bao-yu was surprised.
‘Adamantina is such a strange, contrary person. There are very few people she can
get on with. If she thinks highly of you, it proves that you must be made of finer stuff
than the rest of us.’
‘I don’t know whether she thinks particularly highly of me,’ said Xiu-yan, ‘but we
were neighbours for ten years. When she was serving her novitiate at the Coiled
Incense Temple, there was only a party wall separating her from the place where my
family lived. My family was too poor to own a house and for ten years lived in rented
accommodation in her temple. Whenever I had nothing else to do, I used to go inside
the nuns’ courtyard and spend my time with Adamantina. It was she who taught me
to read and write. In fact, everything I know, practically, I owe to her. So you see,
she’s not only my “hard times friend”; she is also in a sense my teacher. When my
parents finally came here to throw themselves on the generosity of your family, we
learned that Ada?mantina, too, had found a home here. She had evidently found this
a place where her eccentricities would be tolerated and where she would be safe
from molestation by those having the power to persecute her. It seemed as if our
destinies must be linked. And I was glad to find, when I went to look her up here, that
her friendship for me was unaltered. In fact, I think that if anything she is even nicer
to me now than she was before.’
As if by a flash of lightning, the mystery of Xiu-yan’s utter alienness from her
appalling parents was revealed.
‘I see!’ he said. ‘That ethereal, crane-in-the-clouds quality one notices in everything
you do or say-I see now where you get it from. As a matter of fact it’s something to
do with Adamantina that has brought me out. Something she wrote has been
puzzling me and I was on my way to ask someone else’s advice about it when I ran
into you. It’s an extraordinary bit of luck that I did, because you are obviously much
better qualified to advise me than the person I had been intending to ask.’
He took the piece of paper from his sleeve and showed it to her. Xiu-yan ran her eye
over it and laughed.
‘She’ll never change. The same whimsical, preposterous Adamantina as always!
Who but Adamantina would use her nom-de-plume in a birthday greeting? Talk
about “a monk no monk and a maid no maid”! What sort of etiquette is that?’
‘I don’t agree,’ said Bao-yu, smiling. ‘Adamantina is above etiquette. She doesn’t
subscribe to the conventions of our mundane world. Her writing to me in this way
shows that she must credit me with some intelligence. Unfortunately I haven’t the
faintest idea in what terms I ought to reply. I was on my way to ask Cousin Lin’s
advice when I was fortunate enough to bump into you.’
For some moments Xiu-yan ran her eyes up and down Bao-yu appraisingly. Finally
she broke into a laugh.
‘“The sight of it exceedeth the report thereof.” I see now what they mean. I’m not
surprised she sent you this. And I’m not surprised she gave you all that plum-blossom
last year. Well, if even Adamantina has succumbed, I suppose I shall have to do my
little bit by explaining what this means.
‘Adamantina is fond of saying that out of all the poems by all the poets of the Han,
Jin, North-and-South, Tang and Song dynasties, a couple of lines in Fan Cheng-da’s
“Walk in the Cemetery” are the only decent verses ever written:
Though you hide behind a threshold of indestructible iron,
The mound shaped like a wheat-cake will claim you for its own.
That’s why she calls herself “The Dweller Beyond the Threshold”. Her favourite
prose-writer is Zhuang-zi, so sometimes she calls herself “The Outsider”, after
Zhuang-zi’s “outsider ... wandering beyond the realm”. The way to please her is to
refer to yourself modestly as someone still trapped in the toils of the wicked world
while she is floating freely somewhere above them. If she’d called herself “The
Outsider” in this note she’s sent you, the right response would have been to call
yourself “The Worldling” in your reply. As she’s called herself “The Dweller Beyond
the Threshold”, you should refer to yourself in answering as “The Dweller Behind the
Threshold”, to indicate that you have understood the reference to Fan Cheng-da.’
The scriptures tell us that the revelation of the Buddha-truth comes ‘like ghee poured
upon the head’. Bao-yu must have had some such feeling as he listened to Xiu-yan,
for he first of all gave a gasp of discovery and then laughed out loud.
‘I see! That’s why our family temple is called the “Temple of the Iron Threshold”！
Thank you very much. Now I can go and write my reply.’
Xiu-yan continued on her way to Green Bower Hermitage and Bao-yu went back to
write his note. He wrote:
From Bao-yu, Dweller Behind the Threshold, Devout and Humble Thanks.
He carried the note to the Hermitage himself and posted it through the crack
between the double doors.
By the time he got back to Green Delights, Parfumee had just completed her toilet.
She had gone back to the elaborate feminine coiffure which she normally favoured,
complete with kingfisher-feather hair-ornaments; but Bao-yu said he would prefer to
see her permanently got up like a boy. He had her fringe and side-pieces cut off and
the remaining short bits shaved away from her forehead round to the back of her
neck, so that only the long hair growing from the crown of her head remained.
‘We’ll get you a big fur cap with ear-flaps to wear in the winter,’ he said, ‘and big
tiger-boots for your feet, or white socks and thick-soled, stitch-patterned padded
shoes, to go with loose-bottomed trousers. And we’d better change your name.
“Parfumée” won’t do for a boy. What about “Honey Boy”? We can call you “Honey”
for short.’
     Parfumée was delighted.
‘Now you’ll be able to take me with you when you go outside,’ she said. ‘If anyone
asks about me, you can tell them that I’m one of your pages, like Tealeaf.’
Bao-yu smiled at the idea, but seemed rather doubtful.
‘I think sooner or later they’d be able to tell that you weren’t.’
‘You have no imagination!’ said Parfumée ‘Tell them I’m a foreign page. Your
family’s got several foreign pages.* Anyway a pigtail suits me; everyone says it does.
What about it? Don’t you think it’s a brilliant idea?’
Bao-yu was quite won over.
* Stone’s Note to Reader:
Both the Rong and Ning branches of the Jia family did in fact employ a number of
foreign captives taken by previous members of the family in their various military
campaigns and later graciously bestowed on them as bond-slaves by His Imperial
Majesty. They were invariably employed as grooms, being useless for any other kind
of work. Parfumee transvestism was by no means a novelty in the household. The
tomboyish Shi Xiang-yun had long since shown a passion for dressing up in military
uniform and was frequently to be seen wearing a cavalryman’s belt and tight-sleeved
riding habit. When Bao-yu put Parfumee into boy’s clothing, she was quick to follow
suit by dressing her own Althee in a page’s costume. As a ‘painted face’ Althee was
already in the habit of shaving off the short hair above her forehead and round her
ears to facilitate making-up and had acquired a certain masculinity of movement and
gesture from the roles she played, so the transformation was in her case a less drastic
one. Li Wan and Tan-chun were so taken with the result that they decided to dress
Bao-qin’s Cardamome up as a little page as well. Her hair was done up in two knots
like horns, one on each side of her head. Dressed in trousers and a short smock and
with a pair of red shoes on her feet she looked - except for the make-up - exactly like
the scholar’ page, Lute Boy, in the play. Xiang-yun changed Althee’s name to ‘Valiant’
because she thought it suited her. Cardamome was the youngest, liveliest and most
mischievous of the little ex-actresses and the majority of the Garden’s inhabitants
had already taken to calling her by less flattering sobriquets long before her
transformation into a page. After the transformation had been made, Bao-qin
rejected ‘Lute Boy’ as too obvious; and since she liked ‘Cardamome’ and thought it a
pretty name, she resolved to retain at any rate the middle part of it by calling the
new page ‘Damon’.
Stone
‘It’s a very good idea. I’ve often seen officials with little foreign servants - mostly
Tartars or Tibetans captured in the wars. People like to have them as grooms because
they are good at handling horses and don’t mind waiting about in the cold. We’ll
have to give you a foreign name then. What about “Yelü Hunni” ? “Yelü” is an old
Kitan Surname and “Hunni” is what the Xiong-nu used to call themselves.’
Parfumée was very satisfied with this, so it was agreed that in future she would
always be referred to as Yel Parfumée Hunni.
After lunch Patience’s messenger arrived to say that, as the summerhouse in the
Peony Garden was thought to be too hot, her return party had been laid out in the
Shady Elm rooms. You-shi came over well in advance, bringing two of Cousin Zhen’s
little concubines, Lovey and Dove, with her from Ning-guo House. They were very
young and wild and had seldom been taken to the neighbouring mansion before.
Today, meeting such lively members of the Garden’s society as Caltrop, Xiang-yun,
Parfumée and étamine for the first time, they were in their element, quickly proving
the truth of the old saying about ‘birds of a feather’ by chattering nineteen to the
dozen with their new-found friends and dashing off with them on an exploratory tour
of the Garden. You-shi was left to the company of her own maids.
Presently, when they were visiting Green Delights, Caltrop, Lovey and Dove were very
much amused to hear Bao-yu addressing Parfumée as ‘Yelü Hunni’. Having elicited
from her how she came to have acquired so extraordinary a name, they began to try
using it themselves; but in their unpractised mouths the foreign sounds soon
degenerated into ‘Yellow Honey’; and even this was soon abandoned in favour of
‘Yellow Belly’. The maids, hearing them call her this, were all in stitches. Bao-yu
feared that Parfumée would be wounded by their hilarity and proposed yet another
change of name.
‘There is a land in the West called “Fran-see-ya” where they make a kind of golden
glitter-glass called “aventurin”. You are such a bright and glittering person yourself: I
think the name Aventurin would suit you very well.’
Parfumée was delighted with it. But it was still no good: the others found ‘Aventurin’
too difficult; and having established that it was the name of some kind of foreign
glass, soon took to calling her ‘Glassy’ or ‘Glass-eyes’ instead.
      But we digress.
      The party in the Shady Elm rooms had now begun. Once more wine was made
an excuse for much unrestrained hilarity. The blind ballad-singers were asked to drum
for them and Patience broke off a spray of peonies to play ‘passing the branch’ with.
There must have been near enough twenty people taking part in the game. Just as
the fun was at its height, it was announced that two women had arrived delivering
things from the Zhen family in Nanking and Tan-chun, Li Wan and You-shi had to go
off to the jobs room to receive them. The others decided to make a little break in the
party while they did so, in which those who wanted to could take some exercise
outside. Lovey and Dove decided to have a swing.
      ‘You get up as well,’ Bao-yu said to Lovey, who was pushing. ‘I’ll push you both.’
      ‘Oh no you don’t!’ said Lovey. ‘I know your kind of pushing! Yellow-belly can
push us.’
      ‘Please,’ said Bao-yu exasperatedly, ‘don’t call her by that horrible name! You’ll
have all the others calling her by it as well.’
      Dove was giggling helplessly on the swing.
      ‘Stop it, you two! I can’t work this thing properly if you make me laugh. I shall
fall off, if you’re not careful, and knock all the gravy out of you!’
      While they were in the midst of their diversions, a group of servants from the
Ning-guo mansion came rushing up in a state of great agitation.
      ‘Sir Jing is dead!’
      ‘Dead?’ Everyone hearing them was incredulous. ‘But he hadn’t been ill. How
can he have died so suddenly?’
      ‘He spent all his time looking for the secret of immortality.’ said one of the
servants. ‘Perhaps he found it and went off to heaven.’
      You-shi heard the news with dismay. There would be so much to do, and with
Cousin Zhen, Jia Rong and Jia Lian all three away, no dependable male around to help
her. The first thing she did, of course, was to remove all her jewellery and the
ornaments from her hair. Then, having ordered some of the household to go on
ahead and put all the Taoists there under lock and key pending her husband’s return,
she got into her carriage and drove with all speed to the Dark Truth Monastery
outside the city, accompanied by the Chief Steward Lai Sheng’s wife and several of
the senior stewardesses. Meanwhile other servants were dispatched to various
members of the faculty requesting their attendance at the monastery.
The physicians duly arrived. As the patient was already dead, there was little scope
for their customary methods of diagnosis; but they knew that Sir Jing had gone in for
breath-control and various other kinds of Taoist hocus-pocus, some of which, like the
worship of the Seven Stars, the keeping of ‘ghost-worm’ vigils and the swallowing of
mercuric ‘elixirs’, must have gravely weakened his constitution and may well have
hastened his death; and when they saw the purple face and cracked and shrivelled
lips of the corpse and felt the iron-hard abdomen, they had little difficulty in forming
their collective opinion, which their spokesman delivered forthwith to the waiting
women: ‘That death was due to edema and corrosion following ingestion by the
deceased of some toxic metallic substance in pursuance of his Taoist researches.’
‘It wasn’t toxic,’ protested the Taoists, alarmed for their own safety. ‘It was an
infallible secret formula, but it needed to be taken in the right conditions. We told
him he wasn’t ready for it, but he wouldn’t believe us. He must have taken it during
the vigil last night, when he was meditating on his own and there was nobody around
to stop him. He will have gone straight to heaven, of course: such faith is sure to be
rewarded. We must rejoice that he has cast off the corrupt gar?ment of flesh and left
this sea of misery behind him.’
But You-shi had no intention of getting drawn into an argument. Her only reply was
to give orders that they should all be locked up again and remain so until Cousin
Zhen could deal with them when he got back. Riders were dispatched post-haste to
inform him of his father’s death.
You-shi could see at a glance that the monastery’s accommodation was far too
cramped for the lying-in-state; on the other hand there could be no question of her
taking the corpse back with her into the city. She therefore had it wrapped up and
carried in a curtained chair to the Temple of the Iron Threshold. And as she calculated
that it would probably be at least half a month before Cousin Zhen got back, by
which time, as this was the hottest part of the year, the process of decomposition
would already be well advanced, she decided, acting on her own initiative, to consult
an astrologer and find out the earliest date on which the body could be encoffined.
The coffin was conveniently to hand, having been deposited in the Temple of the Iron
Threshold when it was purchased some years previously. The formal going into
mourning and its attendant ceremonies were scheduled to take place three days later.
Staging was put up in readiness for the Taoists and Buddhists, but their requiems
were to be deferred until Cousin Zhen should have returned.
While You-shi and the already depleted staff were attending to these matters outside
the city, no one with authority was left in the two mansions able to deal with callers
from outside. On the Rong-guo side Xi-feng was still unable to see people because of
her illness, Li Wan was fully occupied in looking after the young people, and Bao-yu
was too lacking in savoir-faire to be trusted. It was necessary to call in a number of
obscure junior clansmen who had done occasional odd-jobs for the family in the past:
Jia Bin, Jia Guang, Jia Heng(Ⅰ), Jia Chang and Jia Ling. On the Ning-guo side even the
internal running of the household was a problem, since You-shi was for the time
being unable to get back at all. She had to call on her step-mother, old Mrs You, to
keep an eye on things for her. As Mrs You had two young unmarried daughters by a
previous marriage, the most sensible arrangement seemed to be to bring the girls
with her and install herself in temporary residence at Ning-guo House.
At this point our story moves elsewhere. As soon as the news reached him of his
father’s death, Cousin Zhen made an urgent application for leave of absence to the
Board of Rites. He included Jia Rong’s name in the petition, since Jia Rong was,
nominally at any rate, the holder of a commis?sion. The officials of the Board of Rites,
bearing in mind His Imperial Majesty’s devotion to the Late Emperor and
determination to give fullest expression to it in these obsequies of the Late Emperor’s
favourite Consort, dared not grant leave of absence on their own initiative and
referred the matter to the Emperor himself in a memorial. But the Son of Heaven,
with that godlike compassion that is so typical of him, far from making his own
bereavement an objection, saw it as all the more reason for sympathizing with the
bereavement of a subject - particularly one whose ancestor had performed such
great and signal services for the Crown. His immediate reac?tion on reading the
memorial was to ask for particulars of Jia Jing’s official rank. The Board of Rites
memorialized back as follows:
Jia Jing: Palace Graduate, Second Class. His hereditary office and emoluments were
passed on during his lifetime to his son Jia Zhen. Owing to age and ill-health, he had
for some years past been living in religious seclusion at the Dark Truth Monastery,
where he was resident at the time of his death. Jia Zhen and his son Jia Rong are in
attendance here at the mausoleum for the obsequies of Her Late Highness and are
Your Imperial Majesty’s petitioners for leave to absent themselves in order to attend
to the funeral arrangements.
On receipt of this memorial His Imperial Majesty was graciously pleased to issue the
following Rescript:
Although Jia Jing’s own life appears to have been undistin?guished by service to the
state, nevertheless in recognition of the distinguished record of loyal service to the
Crown of his grandfather the Duke of Ning-guo it is Our pleasure that a Court
appointment carrying the honours and entitlements of an officer of the Fifth Rank
should be bestowed upon him posthumously, and that his son and grandson should
be authorized to convey his remains into the Capital, entering by way of the Lower
North Gate, and to display them there in their private residence in the customary
manner; and thereafter, having duly carried out all rites and ceremonies that are
lawful to be performed, to convey them thence to the deceased’s registered place of
origin for interment. And furthermore it is Our pleasure that Our treasury at the
Imperial Victuallers should disburse to the said son and grandson a sum being the
equivalent of one portion of funeral offerings of the First Grade towards the
defrayment of the said Jia Jing’s funeral expenses; and that it should he lawful and
permitted for holders of Court appointments up to and including the rank of Prince
and Duke to make offerings and condolences.
     When the contents of this Rescript were made known, it was not only the
members of the Jia family who expressed their gratitude: all the great officers of the
Court were loud in their praises of this extraordinary example of Imperial
magnani?mity.
Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong at once set off on horseback, determined to ride both night
and day until they reached their destination. About half way along their road they
came upon a group of horsemen riding hell-for-leather towards them who turned out
to be Jia Bin and Jia Guang at the head of a party of Jia family domestics. They threw
themselves from their saddles as soon as they recognized Cousin Zhen and touched
knee and hand to the ground in the Manchu salute.
‘Why have you come?’ Cousin Zhen asked them.
‘Mrs Zhen was worried that when you and Rong left there would be no one to
escort Her Old Ladyship,’ Jia Bin replied, ‘so she sent us to take your place.’
Cousin Zhen expressed his approval of his wife’s thoughtfulness.
‘And what about things at home?’ he asked. ‘How have you been managing?’
Jia Bin told him how You-shi had had the Taoists put under arrest, how she had had
Jia Jing’s body moved to the family temple, and how, in order that there might be
someone at home to keep an eye on things during her absence, she had persuaded
her step-mother and two step-sisters to move into temporary residence at Ning-guo
House. At mention of the two step-sisters the face of Jia Rong, who had dismounted
when the others did, was observed to break into a grin. For his part Cousin Zhen
merely nodded, observed several times over that these arrangements were ‘very
sensible’, and, touching the riding-whip to his horse’s flanks, was on his way once
more.
Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong rode on then through daylight and darkness, stopping at
post-houses along the way only long enough to obtain a change of mount. It was
night-time when they approached the outskirts of the Capital and well after two in
the morning when they reached the Temple of the Iron Threshold. Those keeping
watch had to rouse the others up to meet them. Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong
dismounted and lifted up their voices in loud wailing. Still wailing, they crawled on
their knees all the way from the Outer gate of the temple to the lying-in-state room
inside. There, at the foot of the coffin, they knocked their heads repeatedly on the
floor and wept with abandon until daylight, by which time they had all but lost their
voices.
After a brief intermission during which Cousin Zhen was greeted by You-shi and the
rest (for he had not, till that moment, had an opportunity of speaking to them) he
and Jia Rong changed into the appropriate hempen mourning-garments before
returning to bow once more at the foot of the coffin.
Cousin Zhen found it impossible to achieve quite that state of self-absorbed grief -
‘oblivious to all around’ - which books of etiquette require of the bereaved son: there
were too many things that needed attending to. For example, friends and relations
had to be informed about the Gracious Rescript permitting a lying-in-state at the
mansion and the receiving of offerings and condolences there. Jia Rong was ordered
back home to make all preparations necessary for receiving the coffin.
Jia Rong was pleased with his commission. Hurrying to horse, he rode briskly into the
city. As soon as he got back, he ordered the servants to begin clearing the furniture
from the front reception hall at Ning-guo House and making a shrine for the coffin
there out of screens and hangings. He also told them to put up awnings for the
funeral bands outside the doorway, and a cloth and cane archway which should later
be covered with funerary inscriptions. When he was satis?fied that all this work was
well in hand, he hurried into the inner apartments to meet his grandmother and two
young aunts.
The Hon. Mrs You (the late Mr You - You-shi’s father – had been a mandarin of the
sixth rank) was an elderly lady much given to taking naps. She was in fact recumbent
upon the kang and refreshing herself with sleep at the moment when Jia Rong
entered. It was the two daughters, sewing amidst their maids, who welcomed him.
‘I’m glad you’ve come, Auntie,’ said Jia Rong, grinning broadly at the elder of them.
(Her name was Er-jie.) ‘Father has been longing to see you.’
Er-jie turned red.
‘Now look here, young Rong,’ she said, ‘you behave yourself! I suppose you are one
of those people who, if they don’t get a good telling-off every once in a while, don’t
feel comfortable. You are supposed to be a well-bred, educated young gentleman,
yet a coolie would have better manners.’
She picked up the nearest object to hand, which happened to be a flat-iron, and
made as if to aim it at his head. Jia Rong ducked in alarm, clasping his head in his
arms; he ducked not away from her, however, but towards her, and ended up on her
bosom, laughing and begging for mercy. At this the younger sister, San-jie, came over
and tried to fasten her nails upon his mouth.
‘We’ll tell our sister about you when she gets back.’
Jia Rong knelt between them on the kang, entreating them not to, whereupon the
two sisters collapsed in laughter.
He noticed that Erjie was eating cardamums and made a grab at them intending to
take some for himself. As he did so, Er-jie spat a chewed-up mouthful of them in his
face. Quite unperturbedly, he began licking off the particles that he could reach with
his tongue and nibbling them. This was more than even the maids could stomach.
‘Look at you, freshly in mourning and your old grannie lying there right under your
nose!’ they said. ‘These are your aunts, after all, even though they are so young: you
ought to have more respect for your mother than to treat her family like this. Wait till
we tell the Master when he gets back: he’ll give you what for!’
Temporarily abandoning his aunts, Jia Rong went over to the maids, put his arms
around two of them and began kissing them.
‘My darlings, you are so right! I shan’t interfere with them any more.’
The maids pushed him off indignantly.
‘Pig!’ The maid who said this spoke with feeling. ‘You have a wife and maids of your
own; what do you need to come bothering us for? An understanding person would
realize that this was only fun, but what about someone who didn’t know? There are
plenty of dirty-minded, gossiping busy?bodies who would be only too pleased to go
tattling about this sort of thing to the other mansion, and before you know where
you are the gossips there will be passing round the most terrible stories about us.’
‘Their household is completely separate from ours,’ said Jia Rong, ‘why should they
bother about what we do here? Anyway, they’ve got scandal enough of their own to
keep them busy! Every family history has got a few scandals in it. Look at the stories
they tell about the rulers of the Han and Tang dynasties: “Filthy Tang and stinking
Han” they say, don’t they? If even the families of emperors were like that, you can
hardly expect ours to be any different. As for the household next door: look how
strict Great-uncle She is, yet Uncle Lian still manages to get up to a few tricks with
that little chamber-wife; and look what a tough nut Aung Feng is, yet that didn’t stop
Uncle Rui thinking he could settle her business. Do you imagine I don’t know what
they get up to over there -?’
He seemed to be warming to the subject and would doubtless have treated them to
other even less edifying examples of Rong-guo depravity, had not the old lady
suddenly woken up at that point, necessitating an abrupt change of manner. At once
he dropped down on his knee and began inquiring solicitously about her health.
‘It is so good of you to have gone to all this trouble for us, Grandma,’ he said, ‘and
for Auntie Er and Auntie San to put up with so much inconvenience on our behalf.
Father and I don’t know how to thank you. I expect after this business is over we
shall all be coming round to your place and making you a kotow.’
‘Bless the boy, what eloquence!’ said the old lady, nodding appreciatively. ‘For our
own kin, though: it’s the least we could do. And how is your father?’ she asked him.
‘When did he hear the news? When did you get back?’
‘We’ve only just got back,’ said Jia Rong. ‘Father sent me on to see you immediately.
He was particularly anxious that I should persuade you to stay here until everything is
over.’
He winked at the two young aunts while he was saying this. Er-jie pretended to grind
her teeth angrily, though she was trying not to laugh.
‘Glib-tongued little ape!’ she said. ‘We’re to be kept around here as second strings
for your father, I suppose?’
‘Don’t you worry!’ said Jia Rong, his eye on the old lady. ‘My father has your
interests very much at heart. He’s been looking for years now for a couple of
well-placed, rich, handsome young husbands for my two aunties. Now he’s found
one at last - someone he met the other day on the journey.’
He was only joking, but the old lady took it all as gospel truth and asked him what the
name was of this prospective son-in-law. Er-jie, laughing, laid down her sewing and
ran across to strike him.
‘Don’t believe a word he says, Ma! He’s a wicked liar!’
Even the maids were outraged.
‘If the Lord in Heaven can hear you, you’d better watch out for the lightning!’ said
one of them.
Just then a servant entered:
‘We’ve finished all the things you told us to do, Master Rong. Will you go back now
and tell the Master it’s all ready?’
Off went Jia Rong then, smiling all over his face.
But what happened after that will be told in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 64

Five fair women make subjects for
a chaste maid’s verse
And nine jade dragons make a
love-gift for a flirt



As soon as Jia Rong learned that evening was ready, he returned to the temple and
reported to his father to that effect. At once preparations for the procession into the
city were put in motion. Bearers were organized, insignia, funeral banners and all the
other paraphernalia got ready overnight, and messengers hurriedly sent out to
relations and friends telling them when the procession would set out: five o’clock on
the morn?ing of the fourth.
The procession, needless to say, was of dazzling magnificence, and troops of
mourners took part in it. It provoked varying reactions from the crowd numbering
many thousands who lined the road to watch it, all the way from the Temple of the
Iron Threshold to the gates of Ning-guo House. Some took a simple pleasure in the
spectacle; others admired the wealth which had created it; but there were also a few
sour-faced Confucian scholars who looked down their noses and muttered something
about sumptuousness being no substitute for grief. A buzz of discussion followed its
passing all along the route.
The procession reached the mansion at about three in the afternoon; the coffin was
deposited in its shrine in the main hall; offerings were made; the lament was raised.
After that the mourners began gradually to depart. Only those members of the Jia
clan remained who had undertaken to lend the family a hand with the reception.
Among relations not of the Jia sur?name the only one to stay behind was Lady Xing’s
brother, Xing De-quan.
As long as there were visitors around, convention obliged Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong
to remain in appropriately grief-stricken attitudes beside the coffin, conforming, as
far as possible, to the scriptural canons on mourning which enjoin the bereaved son,
among other things, to ‘lie upon rushes with a sod of earth for his pillow’; but as
soon as the last guest had gone, they were off like a shot to enjoy the society of their
young female relations inside.
Throughout this period Bao-yu too was expected to put on mourning and go over
every day to Ning-guo House to spend the whole day there beside the coffin. Xi-feng
was not well enough to go over daily, but on days when there were sutra-readings
and the callers were numerous, she would drag herself over and lend You-shi a hand
in entertaining the wives.
One morning after the early offering, when Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong, worn out by a
succession of short nights and long, exhausting days, lay dozing beside the coffin,
Bao-yu thought that as there were no visitors he might just as well go back home and
see Dai-yu. Calling at Green Delights on the way, he found the courtyard silent and
deserted. In the coolness of the surrounding gallery a few old women and junior
maids were sitting or lying about in various postures of sleep. He had no wish to
disturb them, and would have made his way into the house alone; but just as he was
approaching the doorway, Number Four caught sight of him and started up,
intending to raise the blind for him to enter. She had not time to do so however, for
at that very moment Parfumée came rushing out and very nearly ran into him. She
checked her?self just in time.
‘What are you doing here?’ There was an expression of pleased surprise on her face.
‘Don’t let Skybright get me! She’s trying to hit me.’
Inside the room there was a clatter of numerous tiny objects striking the floor and a
moment later Skybright burst through the doorway in pursuit.
‘Where are you, you little wretch? If you’ve lost, you have to have a slap. It’s no
good running to Bao-yu to protect you: he isn’t here today.’
Bao-yu laughingly intercepted her.
‘She’s only little. I don’t know how she’s offended you, but won’t you forgive her for
my sake?’
Bao-yu’s sudden appearance at that moment was so unexpected that Skybright
found it comical.
‘Parfumée must be a little witch! I wouldn’t have thought even magic spells could
bring someone so quickly! Well, I don’t care!’ she said, having recovered somewhat
from her surprise. ‘Magic or no magic, I’m going to get her!’
She wrested the arm free that Bao-yu was holding and darted at Parfumée; but
Parfumée dodged behind Bao-yu’s back and clung to him. Bao-yu took Skybright by
one hand and Parfumée by the other and walked with them into the room. There, on
the kang under the west wall, Musk, Ripple, Emerald and Swallow sat playing dibs:
melon-seeds for winners and slaps for losers. Parfumée had lost to Skybright and run
out to avoid the slap. The clattering noise that Bao-?yu had heard was the sound of
dib-stones falling from Skybright’s lap when she got up to chase her. Bao-yu surveyed
the scene approvingly.
‘I thought you’d be a bit quiet here with me away,’ he said. ‘And as the days are so
long now, I was afraid you might be going to sleep after lunch and making yourselves
ill. I’m glad you’ve found a way of keeping yourselves amused - Where’s Aroma?’ he
asked, suddenly noticing that she was not with them.
‘Oh, Aroma,’ said Skybright. ‘Aroma’s gone religious. She’s sitting on her own in the
next room like Bodhidharma with her face to the wall. I haven’t dared disturb her so I
haven’t the least idea what she’s doing. Whatever it is, she’s being very quiet about it.
You’d better go in and have a look: perhaps she’s attained Enlightenment!’
Bao-yu laughed and went into the inner room. He found Aroma sitting on the couch
by the window making knots in a length of grey silk cord. She rose to her feet as he
entered.
‘What lies has that wretch Skybright been telling about me? I wanted to get on with
this knotting, that’s what I came in here for. I hadn’t got time to fool about with the
others, so I pretended that I wanted to take advantage of your being away by sitting
here quietly on my own and meditating for a bit. Bodhidharma, indeed! I’ll pinch that
girl’s mouth!’
Bao-yu laughed and sat down beside her to watch her knot.
‘The days are so long now, you ought to take a break of some kind. If you don’t
fancy playing with the others, why not come with me to see Cousin Lin? Surely it’s
much too hot for knotting?’
‘I noticed that you’re still wearing that old black fan-cover we made for you when
you went into mourning for Mrs Rong. As long as you were only wearing it once or
twice a year, it didn’t seem worth the trouble of replacing it; but now that you have
to wear summer mourning every day at the other House, I thought it was high time I
made you a new one. As soon as I’ve finished this cord for it, you can take the old
one off and put it on. I know you don’t care very much about this sort of thing, but if
Her Old Ladyship were to see you wearing the old one when she got back, she’d be
sure to blame me for neglecting you. She’d say I was too lazy even to notice what you
were wearing.’
Bao-yu smiled.
‘It’s very nice of you to have thought about it. But don’t drive yourself too hard. You
don’t want to give yourself a heat stroke.’
At that moment Parfumée came in carrying a cup of water?-cooled tea for him on a
tray. Because as a little boy he had been delicate, Bao-yu was never given ice-cold tea
to drink in summer. To cool his tea they plunged the tea-pot into a basin of water
freshly drawn from the well. The water was changed several times until the tea inside
the pot, though not chilled, had reached a pleasant freshness. He drank half the
contents of the cup while Parfumée held it to his lips, then turned his head back
again to address Aroma.
‘I told Tealeaf when I left that if anyone important turns up at Cousin Zhen’s, he is
to let me know immediately; otherwise I shan’t be going back there.’
He got up to go. As he was leaving the house, he called back to Emerald and the
others in the outer room:
‘If I’m wanted for anything, you’ll find me at Miss Lin’s.’
On his way there, just as he was about to cross Drenched Blossoms Bridge, he came
upon Snowgoose followed by two old women carrying an assortment of caltrops,
melons and lotus-roots.
‘What are they for?’ Bao-yu asked her. ‘I know your mistress never eats that sort of
thing. Is she expecting Mrs Zhu or someone?’
‘If I tell you, you mustn’t let on when you see her,’ said Snowgoose.
Bao-yu nodded.
‘You can go on ahead and give that stuff to Miss Nightingale,’ Snowgoose said to
the two women. ‘If she asks you why I’m not with you, tell her I’m doing something
and I’ll be back directly.’
The women made some reply and continued on their way. Snowgoose waited until
they were out of earshot.
‘The Mistress has been feeling a bit better this last day or two. But when Miss Tan
looked in after lunch today and wanted her to go with her to call on Mrs Lian, she
wouldn’t go. She appeared to be thinking about something and had a little cry. Then
presently she picked up her writing-brush and did a lot of writing - poetry I think. She
told me to send out for some melons and things. While I did that, she said,
Nightin?gale was to clear the qin-table in the inner room, move it into the outside
room, and put the dragon incense-burner on it. She said she’d tell us what to do with
the melons when I got back. If she’s planning to entertain someone, I don’t see what
she wants the incense-burner for - certainly not for burning incense in, because she
doesn’t like incense as a rule. She likes to have fresh flowers and fruit and gourds
about her but not incense because she doesn’t like the smell of it in her clothes.
Anyway, if she does want to burn some, why not in the inner room, where she
spends all her time? Unless it’s because the old women have made the outer room a
bit smelly and she’s burning it to get rid of the smell. The fact is, I really don’t know.
You’ll have to go and find out for yourself.’
While she was speaking, Bao-yu had unconsciously lowered his head.
‘From what Snowgoose says,’ he thought, ‘there must be some other reason for
this. She wouldn’t have things put out specially if she were merely entertaining one
of the girls. Perhaps today is the anniversary of Aunt Lin’s death. No, just a bit: it can’t
be. When it is, Grandma always sends her the stuff for the offering and she’s done
that already this year. Perhaps it’s for a seasonal offering. Perhaps she’s been reading
the Doctrine of the Mean:
In each season of the year ... offer things seasonable
It’s possible. If I go and see her now, when she is feeling upset, I am sure to want to
talk her out of it and shall probably only succeed in causing her to suppress her grief.
On the other hand, if I don’t go, then with no one there to stop her, she may simply
go on getting more and more upset. Either way will be bad for her. The best thing will
be for me to go and see Cousin Feng first, sit with her for a bit, and look in at Cousin
Lin’s on my way back. Then, if she is still upset, I shall try to find some means of
consoling her. In that way I shall be able to prevent her grief from getting out of hand,
though at the same time she will have had a chance of giving it expression, so that
there will be no danger of its being unhealthily repressed.’
Having come to this decision, he let Snowgoose go on to the Naiad’s House alone and
made his way out of the Garden to Xi-feng’s place. He arrived just as a number of
women-servants who had been reporting on household matters were leaving. Xi-feng
herself was leaning inside the gateway talking to Patience. She smiled at Bao-yu as
she saw him come.
‘You’ve come back, then? I’ve just this moment been telling Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife to
send someone over to the other place to tell your pages that if you don’t appear to
be doing anything they ought to slip in and ask you to come back here for a rest. I
was afraid that in this hot weather with so many people milling around there, you
might find the sweaty smells a bit too much for you. But you’ve come back anyway,
so I needn’t have bothered.’
‘Thank you for the kind thought, though,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I decided to come back here
partly because there was nothing there for me to do, but also because I noticed that
you haven’t been over there for some days and I wanted to see if you were all right.
How are you feeling lately?’
‘Oh, still pretty much the same,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Still up one day and down the next.
Now that Grandmother and your mother are away, those senior women are getting
quite out of hand, fighting or quarrelling about something or other every day. We’ve
even had cases of gambling and thieving recently. Of course, your sister is a great
help; but she’s a young unmarried girl and there are certain things she can’t be told
about. When they crop up, I have to struggle out of bed and deal with them myself.
So I don’t really get a lot of rest. Under the circumstances there’s not much prospect
yet of getting better: all I can hope is that I shan’t get any worse!’
‘I know. But you’ve got to look after yourself,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You must try not to
worry so much.’
He chatted with her a little longer before going back into the Garden. Arriving at the
Naiad’s House, he could see the remains of incense smoke as he entered the
courtyard gate. In the outer room there was a wet patch on the flagstones where a
libation had been poured, and Nightingale was super?vising the removal of the
qin-table to the inside room and the replacement of various other objects and bits of
furniture. Concluding that the little service (if that is what it had been) must just be
over, he went inside. Dai-yu was lying down with her face to the wall. She looked ill
and exhausted. At the sound of Nightingale’s ‘Master Bao, Miss’, she raised herself
wearily, though with a smiling face, and invited him to sit by her.
      ‘How have you been these last few days, coz?’ he said. ‘You look a bit calmer
than you did, but something seems to have been upsetting you.’
‘I can’t imagine why you should say so,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I am perfectly all right.’
‘How can you expect me to believe that?’ said Bao-yu. ‘The tears are still wet on
your face. You should learn to take things a bit easier. It is bad for a person who has
so much illness to be constantly indulging in grief. If you end up by undermiring your
health; I-’
     The realization that what he was about to say was probably something that
ought not to be said caused the words to stick in his throat. For although, from the
fact that he and Dai-yu had grown up together, there existed a most perfect
sympathy between them, although there was nothing in the world that either of
them wanted more than to live and die in each other’s company, the understanding
that this was so was a wordless one which had never been expressed. In the past,
because Dai-yu was so sensitive, words had all too often proved a stumbling-block.
And now today, when the whole point of his coming here was to comfort her, here he
was again, on the point of saying something that would offend her! Finding that he
could not go on, a sort of panic gripped him. He feared he was going to make her
angry; and yet he so desperately wanted to help her. As he thought about it, the
panic gave way to a feeling of helpless sadness and he began to cry.
Dai-yu, sensing that he was about to make one of those extravagant statements that
she always found so irritating, had indeed been on the point of getting angry; but
when she saw his internal struggle and the tears which followed it, she felt not angry
with him but moved, and being herself of a tearful disposition, was soon sitting there
in silence and weeping with him for company. To Nightingale, who came in at that
moment with some tea, it appeared as if they must have been having a quarrel.
      ‘Just when Miss Lin is getting along nicely,’ she said to Bao-?yu with some
asperity, ‘what do you mean by coming along here and upsetting her?’
      Bao-yu laughed and wiped his eyes.
      ‘I’ve done no such thing.’
      To cover up his embarrassment, he got up and began pacing about the room. In
doing so, he caught sight of a sheet of paper sticking out from underneath Dai-yu’s
inkstone. The temptation to reach out and pick it up proved irresistible, and before
Dai-yu could get up and snatch it from him, he had put it in the bosom of his gown.
     ‘Let me read it, Dai!’
     ‘Whatever you come here about,’ said Dai-yu, ‘you always seem to end up by
nosing through my papers.’
     Bao-chai came in while she was speaking.
     ‘What is it you want to read, cousin?’ she asked Bao-yu.
     Bao-yu still had no idea what the piece of paper contained, and because he was
uncertain what Dai-yu’s feelings would be about his reading it, he hesitated to
answer Bao-chai’s question for fear of giving Dai-yu offence. He therefore smiled and
said nothing, while all the time his eyes rested on Dai-yu questioningly. Dai-yu smiled
at Bao-chai and invited her to be seated.
‘I’ve been looking at some lives of famous women,’ said Dai-yu, ‘all of them women
who are famous in history for their beauty or intelligence. There was so much I found
moving - heartening and admirable in some cases, tragic and deplorable in others -
that after lunch today, having nothing better to do, I decided to make a selection of
them and try writing poems about them in which some of those feelings could be
expressed. Then Tan-chun came in and asked me to go with her to see Cousin Feng,
but I didn’t feel up to it. After doing only five of the poems I had planned, I suddenly
felt too tired to go on and left them lying there on the table, little thinking that
Master Bao would come along and dis?cover them. I wouldn’t really mind his seeing
them if it weren’t for the fear that he might go copying them out and showing them
to other people.’
‘When did I ever do such a thing?’ said Bao-yu indignantly. ‘If you’re referring to the
White Crab-flower poems on that fan, I wrote them on it myself in small kai-shu
characters merely for the convenience of always having them by me when I wanted
to look at them. I fully realize that poems written in the privacy of the women’s
quarters are not lightly to be passed around outside. Ever since you spoke to me
about it, I have been careful not to carry that fan with me anywhere but inside the
Garden.’
‘Cousin Lin is right to be worried,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Now that the poems are written
on that fan, there is always the possibility that you might one day forget and carry it
with you to your room outside. Suppose Uncle’s literary gentlemen were to see it
there, they would be sure to ask you who the poems were by. If as a result of that
they were to become public property, it would be extremely unpleasant for us. “A
stupid woman is a virtuous one”: that is what the old proverb says. A girl’s first
concern is to be virtuous, her second is to be industrious. She may write poetry if she
likes as a diversion, but it is an accomplishment she could just as well do without. The
last thing girls of good family need is a literary reputation.’ She paused and gave
Dai-yu a smile. ‘There would be no harm in letting me see them of course. The
important thing is not to allow Cousin Bao to go off with them.’
‘In the light of what you have just been saying,’ said Dai-yu drily, ‘I’m not at all sure
that I ought to let you look at them either. Anyway,’ she pointed to Bao-yu, ‘he’s
already got them.’
Bao-yu assumed from her tone that he might read them. Extracting the paper from
the inside pocket of his gown, he drew up close to Bao-chai so that the two of them
could peruse it together. This is what they read.
Xi Shi
That kingdom-quelling beauty dissolved like the flower of foam.
In the foreign palace, Xi Shi, did you yearn for your old home?
Who laughs at your ugly neighbour with her frown-and-simper now,
Still steeping her yam at the brook-side, and the hair snow-white on her brow?
*
Yu Ji
The very crows are grieving as they caw in the cold night air.
She faces her beaten Tyrant King with a haggard look of despair:
‘Let the others wait for the hangman, to be hacked and quartered and rent;
‘Better the taste of one’s own steel in the decent dark of a tent.’
*
Lady Bright
To a loveliness that dazzled, the palace of Han showed the door;
For ‘the fair are mostly ill-fated’, as has been said often before.
Yet it seems strange that an emperor - even one with such tepid views –
Should abandon his eyes’ own judgement and let a painter choose!
*
Green Pearl
Pebble or pearl - to Shi Chong it was only a rich man’s whim:
Do you really believe your undoubted charms meant so very much to him?
It was fate, from some past life preordained, that made him take his rash stand,
And the craving to have a companion in death’s dark, silent land.
*
Red Duster
She marked the firm, courteous protest, the well-phrased confident plan,
And, under the unsuccessful clerk, saw the essential Man.
The great Yang Su in her eyes was finished from that hour:
He could not hold a girl like her for all his pomp and power.
*
After praising the poems enthusiastically, Bao-yu suggested that, as there were five
of them, a good collective title would be ‘Songs for Five Fair Women’; and without
waiting for Dai-yu’s approval, he picked up her writing-brush and wrote it on the
left-hand side of the sheet after the poems.
‘Whatever subject one chooses for a poem,’ said Bao-chai, ‘it is important that
one’s treatment of it should be original. If one merely plods along in the footsteps of
earlier poets, it doesn’t matter how fine the language is, the lack of originality will
prevent it from being a really good poem. Thus, many poets have taken Lady Bright
as their theme, but the best ones have always contrived to give the subject a new
turn, one emphasizing the sad fate of Lady Bright herself, another the wickedness of
the painter Ma Yan-shou, another the frivolousness of the Han emperor who
employed him to paint portraits of court ladies rather than portraits of distinguished
statesmen and soldiers, and so on. Further new twists were given to this theme by
Wang An-shi:
What brush could ever capture a beauty’s breathing grace?
The painter did not merit death who botched that lovely face.
and by Ou-yang Xiu:
A prince so ill able to control what went on under his nose
Must hope in vain to impose his rule on remote barbarian foes.
Cousin Lin shows the same originality as these two poets, by presenting each of her
subjects in a novel and interesting light -’
Before she could continue with her disquisition, a servant came in to announce that
Jia Lian was back. His arrival at the Ning mansion had been reported some time ago
and he was expected any moment at Rong-guo House. Bao-yu at once got up and,
hurrying out to the front part of the mansion, waited inside the main gate for his
cousin to arrive. He did not have to wait long. Within moments Jia Lian was
dis?mounting from his horse and stepping through the gateway. Bao-yu advanced to
meet him, touched hand and knee to the ground in greeting, and wished good health,
first, as was good manners, to his grandmother and mother, from whom Jia Lian had
come, and then to Jia Lian himself. The cousins then went inside together, hand in
hand. Li Wan, Xi-feng, Bao?-chai, Dai-yu, Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun were
already waiting for Jia Lian in the hall. After each of them had greeted him
individually, he gave them his news.
‘Grandmother will be arriving here early tomorrow. She’s been keeping very well
on the journey. Today she sent me on ahead to make sure that everything here is all
right. I shall be leaving again tomorrow at four o’clock in the morning and going out
of the city to meet her.’
They asked him a few questions about the journey, but because they knew how tired
he must be after so much travel, soon left him so that he could go back to his own
room and get some rest. About the remainder of that day our narrative is silent.
Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang arrived home round about lunchtime the following
day. When the initial greetings were over, the old lady sat for a while and sipped a
cup of tea before taking Lady Wang and the others with her to Ning-guo House. A
great wailing rose up as she arrived. Jia She and Jia Lian had gone there after seeing
the old lady home, and as she and her party entered the room in which the coffin
stood, the two of them advanced to meet her at the head of a number of weeping
clansmen, and supported her one on each side as she ap?proached the coffin. At the
foot of it Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong knelt down, pressing their heads against her skirts
and weeping piteously. To people of advancing years even simulated grief is
distressing, and Grandmother Jia, an arm about each head, wept very bitterly herself,
Jia She and Jia Lian did their best to comfort her, and at last, when her grief had
some?what abated, she moved on, to the right of the coffin-screens, where You-shi
and her daughter-in-law were waiting for her. Here there was more clinging and
weeping, after which those present came forward one by one to salute Grandmother
Jia and welcome her in a more normal fashion.
Cousin Zhen, fearing that Grandmother Jia, who had still not rested properly after her
tiring journey, would become distressed if she were to sit much longer in such
melancholy surroundings, strongly urged her not to stay. When at last he had
prevailed on her to go and she was back in her own apartment at Rong-guo House, it
became evident that the shock of mourning, following so soon upon the discomforts
of travel, had indeed had an adverse effect on her ageing con?stitution. By nightfall
she was showing all the symptoms of incipient illness: heaviness in the head, a
constricted feeling in the chest, a blocked-up nose and hoarseness of the voice. The
doctor was summoned immediately and half that night and the whole of the
following day taken up with consulta?tions, prescriptions and the preparation and
administering of medicine. Fortunately the illness had not yet established itself in her
system and responded rapidly to treatment. There was a slight outbreak of
perspiration round about midnight of the second night and after that her pulse and
temperature both returned to normal. Everyone breathed a sigh of relief; though to
be on the safe side they kept up the dosage for another day.
A few days later it was Jia Jing's 'funeral' - in this case no more than the re-depositing
of his coffin in the family temple. Grandmother Jia was still not well enough to take
part; Bao-yu stayed at home to look after his grandmother; and Xi-?feng was still
insufficiently recovered. Apart from them, all the other members of the Rong-guo
family, Jia She, Jia Lian, Lady Xing and Lady Wang, together with all the men- and
women-servants of their households, accompanied their Ning?-guo cousins to the
Temple of the Iron Threshold. They were back again that evening; but Cousin Zhen,
You-shi and Jia Rong stayed on at the temple for the Hundred Days, at the end of
which Jia Jing was to be taken to his final resting-place in Nanking. Old Mrs You and
her two daughters remained all this while at the Ning-guo mansion to keep an eye on
things.
Jia Lian had heard a good deal in the past about these two step-sisters of You-shi,
though, to his great regret, he had never until very recently had an opportunity of
meeting them. The opportunity had presented itself on the occasion of Jia Jing's
removal into the city. Since then they had become fairly well acquainted.
Acquaintanceship in his case (Jia Lian being what he was) had been accompanied by
the first stirrings of lust. He felt encouraged by an unsavoury rumour he had heard to
the effect that his cousins Zhen and Rong, both father and son, had at one time or
another enjoyed the sisters' favours. Whenever he had a chance to, he flirted or
made eyes at them - unsuccessfully in San-jie's case, for she met all his advances with
indifference, but with a more promising reaction from her sister. Unfortunately, with
so many pairs of eyes watching, he could not follow up his success, apart from which
he was a little scared that Cousin Zhen might be jealous. Between him and Er-jie it
could be said that there was a silent understanding; but for the time being there
could be nothing more.
This all changed after the funeral. Then, at Ning-guo House, apart from Mrs You and
the two sisters and a few maids and older women employed to do the rough work,
hardly anyone from the master apartment was left behind. All the personal maids,
parlour maids and concubines stayed with their master and mistress at the temple.
As for the married servants, their activities were confined to keeping watch at night
and minding the gates by day; and since they had their own quarters outside, they
had no reason to go inside the house except when they were on duty. This seemed to
Jia Lian to be an excellent time to act. A pretended wish to keep Cousin Zhen
company at the temple gave him an excuse for absenting himself fr6m his own house,
whilst the pretext of attending to household matters on Cousin Zhen's behalf
enabled him to make several trips back to Ning-guo House, thus providing him with
further opportunities for pursuing his flirtation with Er-jie.
One day Yu Lu, a junior steward from Ning-guo House, came out to see Cousin Zhen
about some business.
‘The total cost of the procession, including funeral furnishings and hire of labour,
was one thousand one hundred and ten taels. Of that, five hundred taels have
already been paid, leaving six hundred and ten taels outstanding. Yesterday I had the
managers of both agencies round asking me for the rest of the money. I thought I’d
better see you about it and ask you what I’m to do.’
‘Why didn’t you go straight to the counting-house and draw what’s wanted?’ said
Cousin Zhen. ‘I don’t see why you should need to come bothering me about it.,
‘I did go to the counting-house, sir,’ said Yu Lu, ‘but since Sir Jing passed away they
have already paid out so much that they’ve barely got enough left to pay for the
Hundred Days services and the expenses of your stay here in the temple. They
couldn’t pay these bills without eating into what has been earmarked for something
else. That’s why I’ve come out to see you. I wondered whether you would want me
to pay them out of your personal account, or whether there’s some other account
you could transfer the money from. If you will let me know what you want me to do,
I’ll go ahead and do it.’
Cousin Zhen laughed.
‘The days when we had money lying around unused in private accounts have long
since passed. You’ll have to borrow the money where you can.’
It was Yu Lu’s turn to laugh.
‘If it were one hundred or two hundred taels, sir, I might be able to manage
something; but five or six hundred? Where would I get a sum like that at short
notice?’
After thinking for a bit, Cousin Zhen turned to Jia Rong:
‘Go to your mother, Rong, and ask her for that five hundred taels the Zhens of
Nanking sent us after the funeral. It hasn’t been handed in to the counting-house yet.
And ask her to have a rake-around and see if she can’t raise the whole sum.’
Jia Rong hurried off. In a very short time he was back again with his mother’s answer.
‘Mother says two hundred of the five hundred has already been spent. She sent the
remaining three hundred back home for Grandmother You to take care of.’
‘In that case,’ said Cousin Zhen, ‘you’d better go back with Yu Lu to ask her for it
and let him have it. While you’re about it, you’ll be able to see if everything at home
is all right. And of course give my regards to your aunts. Yu Lu, you’ll have to raise the
rest of the money as best you can by borrowing.’
Jia Rong and Yu Lu promised to do his bidding, but just as they were about to
withdraw Jia Lian walked into the room. Yu Lu stepped up to him smartly and
dropped him a salute.
‘What’s happened?’ said Jia Lian.
Cousin Zhen proceeded to explain to him why Yu Lu was there. As he did so, it
occurred to Jia Lian that this would be a good opportunity of going to the Ning-guo
mansion and looking up Er-jie again.
‘It seems a pity to go straining one’s credit for so trifling a sum,’ he said. ‘I had a
little windfall the other day that I haven’t made use of yet. Why don’t I let him have
that to add to your three hundred and save him the trouble of borrow?ing?’
‘That will be splendid,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘Perhaps you will authorize Rong to pick it
up then, when he goes to collect the three hundred?’
‘I think it will be necessary to go for it myself,’ said Jia Lian hurriedly. ‘In any case I
haven’t been home for some days. I really ought to drop in and pay my respects to
Grandmother and Lady Wang and my parents. I shall be able to look in at your place
too, Zhen, and make sure that your servants are behaving themselves. And pay my
respects to your mother?-in-law, of course.’
‘It means imposing on you once again,’ said Cousin Then, smiling. ‘I don’t know
whether I should let you.’
‘For goodness’ sake!’ said Jia Lian. ‘One’s own cousin!’
‘Go with your uncle, then,’ Cousin Zhen instructed Jia Rong, ‘and when you see
Lady Jia and the other ladies and Sir She to make your bow to them, remember to say
that your mother and I send them our regards. And don’t forget to ask whether Lady
Jia is quite better yet and whether or not she is still taking medicine.’
Having ‘yessir’-ed each one of these commands, Jia Rong followed his Uncle Lian
outside. The two of them then took horse and, accompanied by Yu Lu and several
pages, all on horseback, rode out towards the city. As Er-lie was very much on his
mind, Jia Lian beguiled the journey by talking to his nephew about her as they rode
along. He spoke approvingly of her good looks and gentle character. He remarked
what perfect poise she had and what a soft and pleasing way of speaking. In fact, he
concluded, everything about her excited one’s admiration and respect.
‘Everyone speaks so highly of your Aunt Feng, but to my mind she isn’t a patch on
her.’
Jia Rong understood very well where this conversation was leading them.
      ‘If you love her so much, Uncle,’ he said, ‘why not let me he your matchmaker
and arrange for you to have her as your Number Two?’
      ‘Is that a joke,’ said Jia Lian, ‘or are you in earnest?’
‘I’m being perfectly serious.’
Jia Lian laughed:
‘It’s certainly an attractive proposal. The only trouble is, I don’t think your Aunt
Feng would ever stand for it. And besides, your Grandmother You might not be
willing. And haven’t I heard somewhere that your Aunt Er is already engaged to
someone?’
‘None of these is really a problem,’ said Jia Rong. ‘Aunt Er and Aunt San, although
they took his surname, were not really my Grandpa You’s daughters. When Gran
married my Grandpa You as his second wife, she brought them with her from a
previous marriage. I’ve heard Gran say that when she was carrying Aunt Er, her first
husband had an agreement with a friend of his called Zhang, who was a manager on
one of the Imperial Farms and whose own wife was also pregnant at the time. They
agreed that if the children their wives were carrying turned out to be a boy and a girl,
they should be betrothed to each other. In that way Aunt Er was engaged to the
Zhangs’ boy from the moment she was born. Later on the Zhangs lost all their money
in a lawsuit, and Gran lost her first husband and married my Grandpa You, and for
ten or fifteen years now she hasn’t heard a word from them. She often com?plains
about the betrothal and says she wishes she could get it revoked; and Father is
anxious to betroth Aunt Er to some?one else. He’s only waiting until he has found the
right person, and then he means to find out where the Zhangs are, hand them a
small sum of money, and persuade them to sign a deed of revocation. The Zhangs are
so poor, they are hardly likely to refuse. In fact, when they’ve seen the kind of people
we are, they probably won’t dare. And whatever Father and Gran might have thought
about Aunt Er becoming a Number Two in other circumstances, I’m sure they would
have no objection in your case. The only difficulty as I see it is Aunt Feng.’
Jia Lian was so enraptured by the main part of what Jia Rong had been saying, that it
is doubtful whether he heard those last words at all. For some moments he rode on
in silence, a fatuous grin on his face. Meanwhile Jia Rong was thinking.
‘I’ll tell you what, Uncle,’ he said presently: ‘if you’ve got the nerve, there’s one way
of doing this that would be absolutely fool-proof. It would involve you in spending a
bit of money though.’
‘Never mind that, dear boy!’ said Jia Lian eagerly. ‘If you have a plan, just tell me
what it is.’
‘Don’t say anything about this when we arrive,’ said Jia Rong, ‘but wait until I have
had a chance to explain it all to Father and he can arrange it with my Gran. When it’s
all settled, buy a little house somewhere in the streets at the back of our mansion,
furnish it, install one or two married couples to look after it, and then all you have to
do is choose the day: you can marry Aunt Er then and nobody be any the wiser. Of
course, you’d have to impress on the servants that they are not to let on about it; but
provided they don’t talk, there’s no reason why Aunt Feng tucked away in the inner
courtyards should ever hear about it. And by the time you’ve been living together for
a year or two, you ought to be able to ride the storm out even if your secret is blown.
You’d have to face an explosion from Sir She, of course; but you can tell him that you
did it for the family, because Aunt Feng is unable to have a son. And as for Aunt Feng
herself, when she sees that the rice is cooked and knows that it can’t be uncooked,
she’ll have to put up with it. That only leaves the old lady to square, and you should
be able to do that easily enough with a bit of coaxing.’
There is an old saying, ‘Desire maketh the wise man a fool’. Jia Lian was so intoxicated
by his desire for Er-jie that Jia Rong’s idiotic plan struck him as unassailable. The fact
that he was in mourning, the fact that a secret marriage of the kind he was
contemplating was bigamous and illegal, the fact that he had an extremely strict
father and an exceptionally jealous wife - all those things which ought to have given
him pause were lightly brushed aside. Nor did it occur to him that Jia Rong’s counsel
was by no means disinterested. Jia Rong had designs upon Er-jie himself, to which the
presence of his father, when they were all together in the same house; was an
impediment. If Jia Lian married Er-jie, she would have to live outside, and there
would be unlimited opportunities for larks with her whenever Jia Lian was away.
Blind to all this, Jia Lian thanked Jia Rong profusely and promised him a suitable
reward.
       ‘If you can really arrange this for me, dear boy, I’ll buy you a pair of the prettiest
little girls who are to be had and make you a present of them!’
       They were by now approaching the gates of Ning-guo House.
       ‘You go in here and ask my Gran for the money to give to Yu Lu, Uncle. I’m going
on to the other House to pay my respects to the old lady.’
Jia Lian smiled and nodded.
‘When you see her, don’t let on that I came here with you, will you?’
‘All right,’ said Jia Rong; then, leaning over, he added in a low voice in his uncle’s ear:
‘If you should happen to see Aunt Er today, don’t let impatience get the better of you!
A scandal now will make it harder to arrange things later.’
‘Cheeky devil!’ said Jia Lian laughing. ‘Go on, be on your way now! I’ll be waiting for
you here.
While Jia Rong went on to the Rong mansion alone, Jia Lian turned into the gateway
of Ning-guo House. The men-servants temporarily in charge there were waiting
inside the gate to welcome him, with the other servants all lined up behind them.
They clustered round him as he made his way up to the hall. There, for form’s sake,
he asked them a few per?functory questions before dismissing them and continuing
on his way to the inner apartments.
As cousins and intimates having no secrets from one another, Cousin Zhen and Jia
Lian had always felt free to come and go in each other’s apartments without
formality, and so, when Jia Lian approached the main sitting-room of Cousin Zhen’s
apartment, the old women at the door simply raised the portiere for him and let him
go in unannounced.
Looking round him as he entered, Jia Lian saw only Er-?jie and a couple of maids
sewing together on the kang at the southern end of the room. The mother and the
other sister were not in evidence. He went up and greeted her. In response to her
smiling invitation to join her, he climbed up and sat with his back resting against the
openwork partition along the eastern side of the kang, insisting that Er-jie should
take the place of honour. After a few generalities, he asked her where Mrs You and
San-jie were.


‘Just gone out the back to see about something,’ said Er-jie. ‘They’ll be here again
in a moment.’
The maids now went outside to fetch tea, leaving the two of them alone together. Jia
Lian ogled Er-jie meaningfully, but she merely smiled, keeping her eyes demurely
downwards, and pretended not to notice. At this stage, he judged; a physical advance
would be premature. He noticed that as she sat there her hands were continuously
playing with a length of silk handkerchief to which a tiny embroidered bag was
attached. To fill in the embarrassed silence that was developing, he pretended to be
feeling for something at his waist.
‘Oh, I’ve come out without my betel! Give me some betel, my dear, if you’ve got
any.’
‘I have got some,’ said Er-jie, ‘but it’s not for other people.’
Jia Lian laughed and made a movement towards her, as if he intended to snatch the
handkerchief and its little pouch from her by force, whereupon Er-jie, rather than risk
someone coming in and finding them in the midst of an unseemly tussle, threw it
across to him with a little laugh. Jia Lian caught it in mid-air, emptied the contents
into the palm of his hand, selected one single half-eaten nut which he popped into
his mouth and began chewing, and stuffed all the rest back into the bag. He was just
going to hand it back to her when the two maids came in again with the tea. Jia Lian
took a cup from one of them and began sipping it. While the maids were not looking,
he contrived to unfasten a Han jade girdle pend?ant in the form of nine tiny
interlocking dragons that he wore attached to his belt, tie it onto the handkerchief
and toss it back for Er-jie to catch. But Er-jie pretended not to have noticed. She
allowed the handkerchief with the two small objects attached to it to fall beside her
on the kang and went on calmly sipping her tea.
Just then there was a rattle of the portiere and old Mrs You and San-jie came into the
room from the back, attended by two little maids. Jia Lian signalled with his eyes to
Er-jie that she should pick the handkerchief up, but Er-jie continued to ignore him. In
somewhat of a panic by now and wondering what Er-jie could be at, he rose to his
feet arid advanced to meet San-jie and the old lady. When, after exchanging
courtesies with them, he glanced back behind him, Er-jie was stand?ing
unconcernedly in the same place, with the same inscrut?able smile on her face; but
the handkerchief had vanished. He breathed a sigh of relief.
      When they were all seated and a few pleasantries had been exchanged between
them, Jia Lian remembered the business on which he was supposed to have come.
      ‘Zhen’s wife says that she sent a packet of silver to you the other day to look
after for her. It’s wanted now to pay some bills with, so Zhen has sent me to ask you
for it and also to find out if everything at home is all right.’
      Mrs You at once told Er-jie to take the key of the chest and fetch the money for
her.
‘I’m also glad of the opportunity my errand gives me of offering you my respects,
ma’am, and of seeing the young ladies again,’ Jia Lian continued after Er-jie had gone.
‘I must say, you are looking extremely well. But I am sorry the young ladies should
have to put up with the inconvenience of moving into a strange house.’
‘Tut, for one’s own kin!’ said Mrs You, smiling. ‘You are too polite, Mr Lian! It’s of no
consequence where we stay: one bed is as good as another. To tell you the truth,
things have been very difficult for us since Mr You passed away. If it hadn’t been for
the help given us by my daughter’s husband, I really don’t know how we should have
managed. To look after the house for him in his time of trouble is the very least we
can do in return. It can certainly not be spoken of as an incon?venience.’
     Er-jie had now returned with the silver and handed it to her mother; her mother
handed it to Jia Lian; and Jia Lian ordered one of the maids to call in one of the old
women from outside, whom he then instructed to take it to Yu Lu and tell him to wait
for him in the front.
While the old woman was going off with the money, Jia Rong’s voice could be heard
outside in the courtyard and a few moments later he appeared. He greeted his
grandmother and two aunts before turning with a smile to Jia Lian:
‘Sir She has been asking about you, Uncle. He says there’s something he wants you
to do for him. He was going to send someone to fetch you from the temple, but I told
him you were already on your way into the city. He told me that if I ran into you on
my way back, I was to tell you to hurry.’
Jia Lian hastily rose to go, but delayed to hear something that Jia Rong was saying to
Mrs You.
‘You know the other day I was telling you that Father has found a husband for Aunt
Er, Gran. In looks and build he has quite a strong resemblance to Uncle Lian. Does
that please you?’
Since he was pointing a finger at Jia Lian and simultaneously making a face at Er-jie
while he said this, the question appeared to be meant as much for Er-jie as for her
mother. If so, Er?-jie was too embarrassed to answer. Not so her sister, however.
‘Little monster!’ San-jie shouted, half angrily and half in jest. ‘Keep your dirty little
mouth shut - unless you want me to come over and shut it for you!’
Jia Rong retreated, laughing, from the room; and Jia Lian, taking a laughing farewell
of the old lady and her daughters, went out after him. He stopped in the hall again on
his way out to admonish the servants: not to gamble, not to drink, and so forth. Then,
after a private aside with Jia Rong in which he urged him to return with all speed to
the temple and speak about a certain matter to his father, he went with Yu Lu to the
other mansion and gave him the balance of the amount owing. Having dispatched Yu
Lu, he went in to see what his father wanted, and after that to Grandmother Jia’s
apartment to pay his respects. But these are formalities with which we need not
concern ourselves.
We return, then, to the Ning-guo mansion, where Jia Rong, concluding, when he saw
Yu Lu go off with Jia Lian, that there was nothing more for him to do, went back to
the inner apartments for further badinage with his young aunts before setting off
once more for the temple. It was evening when he arrived there and reported back
to his father.
‘Yu Lu got the money all right. And Lady Jia is now completely recovered. She is no
longer taking medicine.’
He availed himself of the opportunity to tell his father about Jia Lian: how, on the
journey into town, he had expressed a desire to take Er-jie as his Number Two and
how he proposed to set her up in a separate establishment, keeping Xi-feng in
ignorance of the marriage.
‘His sole reason for taking a Number Two,’ Jia Rong explained, ‘is that he wants a
son. And the reason he particularly wants Aunt Er is because he feels it would be
better to keep things in the family and have someone he knows, than risk taking
some unknown person from outside. He was very insistent that I should speak to you
about this.’
He omitted to mention that he was the author of this plan.
Cousin Zhen, after reflecting on it, seemed well disposed.
‘Actually, it’s not a bad idea. I wonder whether your Aunt Er would be willing,
though. You’d better go in again tomorrow and have a word with your Grandmother
You. Tell her to talk to your Aunt Er about it and see if she accepts. If she does, we
can go ahead and fix it up properly.’
After a good deal more advice to Jia Rong on how he was to conduct himself, Cousin
Zhen went inside to see You-shi and told her about the plan. You-shi could see at
once that it would not work and did her best to dissuade him; but Cousin Zben’s
mind was made up; and in the end, since she was accustomed to giving in to him,
and since Er-jie was in any case only a step-sister, for whom therefore she felt only
limited responsi?bility, she allowed the menfolk to go ahead and washed her hands
of the whole affair.
Jia Rong went into town next morning and told his grandmother what his father had
told him to say. He also added a good deal of his own. He told her what a capital
person Jia Lian was; how Xi-feng was ill and not expected to get better; how Jia Lian
was planning to buy a house outside and install Er-jie in it temporarily, but how in a
year or two, as soon as Xi-feng was dead, he would move her inside and make her his
Number One. He went on to tell her about the gifts Cousin Zhen would give for the
betrothal and of the wedding presents that Jia Lian was planning for his bride; how
Jia Lian was prepared to look after Mrs You in her old age; and how in due course he
would see San-jie provided with a husband. The Liang dynasty preacher on whom the
heavens rained down flowers could not have spoken with greater eloquence. Mrs You
could hardly fail to agree, particularly in view of the fact that she depended on
Cousin Zhen for her livelihood and that it was he who was sponsoring the marriage.
And Jia Lian was such a fine young gentleman - infinitely superior to that Zhang boy.
She would go to Er-jie at once and talk it over with her.
You Er-jie was a highly impressionable young woman. Already, in the past, she had
compromised herself with her sister’s husband. And she had always resented the
arbitrary betrothal to Zhang Hua (as the Zhangs’ boy was called) which seemed to
condemn her to a lifetime of poverty. If Jia Lian loved her and her brother-in-law was
prepared to give her away, what possible objection could she have to the marriage?
Her consent was given with a nod, conveyed at once to Jia Rong by her mother, and
in due course reported to Cousin Zhen.
Next day Cousin Zhen invited Jia Lian to the temple to hear from his own lips that
Mrs You had consented. Jia Lian, delighted that the matter had been settled with so
little trouble, at once began discussing what to do. Agents had to be engaged to look
round for a suitable house, jewellery for Er-jie’s trousseau had to be ordered, and
furnishings had to be pur?chased for the house. Within a few days all this had been
done. A twenty-frame house in Little Flower Lane about two thirds of a mile north of
Two Dukes Street had been bought, fur?nished throughout, and two little maids
purchased to go with it.
Jia Lian was at first uncertain what to do about older servants. If he used servants
from his own household, their transfer was sure to be detected; on the other hand a
married couple purchased from outside would be strangers, and therefore of
uncertain loyalty and impossible to trust. Suddenly he remembered Bao Er, whose
unfortunate wife had hanged herself after being attacked by Xi-feng in a fit of jealous
rage. At the time Jia Lian had given him some money and promised him a new wife.
The wife he had eventually chosen for him was none other than the Mattress,
widowed since the drunken cook ‘Droopy’ Duo had finally drunk himself to death.
Bao Er had had prior experience of her charms and knew that he was getting a good
bargain; and the Mattress for her part was glad to be married to someone who
(thanks to Jia Lian’s subvention) could afford to be free with his money. This couple,
united in their loyalty to Jia Lian and dislike of Xi-feng, seemed an ideal choice for the
new establishment and were to their immense satisfaction installed in it, along with
the newly-?purchased maids, to be at Er-jie’s disposal when she arrived.
There remained only the matter of Zhang Hua to be dealt with. It was Zhang Hua’s
grandfather who had originally held the managerial post on one of the Imperial
Farms. His father simply inherited the post when the old man died. While holding it,
he had made the arrangement with Mrs You’s first husband, who was his good friend,
as a result of which Zhang Hua and Er-jie were engaged to each other from their
earliest infancy. Some time after that he lost all his possessions in a lawsuit and the
family were reduced to penury so dire that even food and clothing were a problem,
and taking on a new daughter-in-law was, for the time being, wholly out of the
question. Then Er-jie’s mother had remarried, and for fourteen years or more they
had been completely out of touch. Their whereabouts were eventually traced,
however, and Zhang Hua’s father summoned to Ning-guo House and induced to sign
a deed of revocation releasing Er-jie from her betrothal. He did not want to sign it,
but was too intimidated by Cousin Zhen’s air of affluence and authority to object.
After he had signed, Mrs You handed him twenty taels, and that was that.
Everything had now been taken care of. All that remained was for Jia Lian to name
the day. The calendar was consulted and the third of the sixth month, which was just
beginning, was found to be the earliest auspicious day. On that day, it was decided,
Er-jie should be received as a bride in her new home.
But for that event you must await the following chapter.
CHAPTER 65

Jia Lian’s second marriage is
celebrated in secret
And the future marriage of San-jie
becomes a matter of speculation



By the second day of the month, the arrangements jointly agreed on by Jia Lian,
Cousin Zhen and Jia Rong had been completed and Mrs You and San-jie moved into
the new house. A brief inspection of it satisfied Mrs You that, if not quite what Jia
Rong had led her to expect, it was at least excellently furnished, and it could be said
that both she and San-jie were reasonably happy about the move. Bao Er and his
wife could not do enough for them. It was ‘yes, milady’, ‘no, milady’ whenever they
were talking to Mrs You; and San-jie, for the first time in her life, found herself being
addressed as ‘Miss You’, or sometimes even as ‘madam’.
In the last watch of that same night, only an hour or two before the dawning of the
third, Er-jie, seated in a plain chair without bridal trimmings, was carried to her new
home. The incense and paper-offerings for the ceremony, the wedding-feast and
marriage-bed had all been made ready long before she arrived. Jia Lian, also in a
small, plain carrying-chair, arrived shortly afterwards. The bride and groom made
their prostrations to Heaven and Earth, the paper offerings were set fire to, and Mrs
You conducted her heavily-veiled daughter into the marriage-chamber, gratified to
observe the transformation wrought by a completely new and expensive-looking
outfit of clothes and jewellery.
The phoenix-gambollings of the nuptial couch and the mutual delight and cherishing
which they engendered are here passed over. Suffice it to say that the more Jia Lian
saw of Er-jie, the more he loved her, until the desire to make some gesture expressive
of his feelings became overwhelming. All he could think of was to behave in every
way as if Er-jie was his only wife and Xi-feng did not exist. He ordered Bao Er and his
wife to call her ‘Mrs Lian’ and always referred to her himself in that way when he was
speaking to them. When he went back to Xi-feng, as from time to time he was
obliged to, he would tell her that he had been doing something at the Ning-guo
mansion; and Xi-feng, knowing how well her husband got on with Cousin Zhen and
how frequently he was consulted by him, suspected nothing. In spite of their
num?bers, few of the Rong-guo domestics concerned themselves much with Jia
Lian’s activities, and even the few who had the time and curiosity to nose out what
he had been up to were more anxious to win favours by playing up to him than to
gamble on the uncertain advantages of giving away his secret. Everything seemed to
be working out very smoothly and Jia Lian felt immensely grateful to Cousin Zhen for
having made it all possible.
The allowance Jia Lian made to cover the day-to-day expenses of his little household
was fifteen taels a month. On days when he was unable to come, Mrs You and her
two daughters dined together. On days when he was there, he and Er-jie would dine
together and Mrs You and San-jie would eat separately in their own room. Besides
paying Er-jie the allowance, Jia Lian handed over all his private savings to her to look
after for him. He told her everything about Xi-?feng, down to the most intimate
bedroom particulars, and promised her that as soon as Xi-feng died, she should move
into the mansion and live there openly as his wife. It cannot be said that Er-jie found
any of this displeasing. In the meantime the little household was managing very
comfortably.
*
Two months passed quickly by. One evening, as Cousin Zhen was returning from a
day of Buddhist ceremonies at the Temple of the Iron Threshold, he bethought him
that it was some considerable time since he had enjoyed the company of the two You
sisters and decided to pay them a visit. First, though, he sent a boy to the new house
to find out if Jia Lian was there. Delighted when the boy brought back word that he
was not, he ordered most of the servants to return to Ning-guo House without him,
keeping only his two most trusted pages to accompany him on foot to the Yous’
house. They did this walking one on either side of his horse’s head and holding on to
his bridle.
It was already lighting-up time when they got there, but the courtyard gate was still
open. Their arrival was so quiet and discreet that they managed to get inside it
unobserved. The pages tied the horse up in the stable and took themselves off to the
servants’ quarters to await further orders, while Cousin Zhen entered the living-room
alone. He found San-jie and her mother sitting there. The lamp had just been lit.
Shortly after he had finished exchanging greetings with them, Er-jie herself appeared
and made him welcome. Tea was served. Cousin Zhen smiled over his cup at her as
he sipped his tea.
‘Well, do you think I’d make a good marriage-broker? If the husband I picked for
you is no good, I doubt I could find you a better! Your sister will be coming to see you
shortly, by the bye, and bringing you a present.’
Er-jie had already given orders for food and wine to be brought and for the courtyard
gate to be barred. Since their visitor was a member of the family, it seemed
reasonable, that the usual restraints should be relaxed. Presently Bao Er came in with
some things and took the opportunity of offering his respects to Cousin Zhen.
‘You’re a good fellow, Bao,’ said Cousin Zhen affably. ‘I’m sure that’s why Mr Lian
chose you for this job. No doubt there will be even more important work for you in
the future. So don’t go drinking outside and getting yourself into trouble, will you? If
you do as I tell you, I promise to make it worth your while. And let me know if there’s
any?thing you want here. Mr Lian is a busy man, and not all the people in his
household are to be trusted. It’s better to ask me. He and I are not only cousins, you
know; we are also very good friends.’
‘Yes, sir. I shall do my best to give satisfaction, sir,’ said Bao Er. ‘I realize it would be
more than my life is worth to get into any trouble.’
Cousin Zhen smiled and nodded.
‘Good. As long as you know.’
For some minutes the four of them sat drinking together; but Er-jie knew that it was
not for a family evening that Cousin Zhen had come and soon found an excuse for
getting herself and her mother out of the way. She told him that she had to go to the
other side of the house for something and was afraid to do so on her own. As soon as
she and Mrs You were out of the room, Cousin Zhen drew up closer to San-jie. His
behaviour became so familiar that the two maids in attendance grew embarrassed
and slipped off to the kitchen. They were content that Cousin Zhen and San-jie
should enjoy themselves in any way they chose, provided that they did not have to
stay and watch.
Cousin Zhen’s two pages were all this time drinking with Bao Er in the kitchen, while
the Mattress stood at the stove with her back to them. When the two maids burst in
and began laughing and joking with the boys and asking to be given some wine, Bao
Er was far from pleased.
‘What are you girls doing here? You ought to be in the sitting-room. Suppose they
want service in there? There’ll be trouble.’
His wife turned round wrathfully from the stove.
‘Silly old fool! Why don’t you get your nose back into your winecup? The sooner
you’re flat on your back snoring and your little winkle tucked up out of harm’s way,
the better it’ll be for all of us! What’s it to do with you whether they want service in
there or not? I’m here to see to all that. If there’s any rain falling it won’t fall on your
head. So what are you worrying about?’
Bao Er was well aware that it was largely to his wife that he owed his favourable
position with Jia Lian. He did little himself these days but draw his pay and drink his
wine; but so exemplary was the Mattress’s service of Er-jie, that al?though Jia Lian
knew of Bao Er’s failings, he had so far refrained from taking him to task about them
out of con?sideration for her. Bao Er’s awareness of this kept him in obedient
subjection to her. And so, when he heard himself addressed by her in this way, he
merely drank a few more cups in silence and then took himself quietly off to bed.
The Mattress had a few drinks herself now with the pages and the two girls, anxious
to make herself as agreeable as possible so that the pages would give a good report
of her to Cousin Zhen. But just as this little party in the kitchen was beginning to
warm up, it was interrupted by a sudden knocking at the gate. The Mattress hurried
out and opened it as Jia Lian was dismounting from his horse. In answer to his
question whether there was anything to report, she whispered into his ear that Mr
Zhen had come and was at this very moment in the guest-room in the west courtyard.
Jia Lian went straight to his own room, where he found Er-jie sitting with her mother.
The two women seemed somewhat flustered by his arrival, but he pretended not to
notice.
‘Bring us some wine,’ he told the Mattress. ‘I think I shall have a cup or two and
then go to bed. I feel rather tired tonight.’
At once Er-jie was all over him, taking his coat, fetching him tea, asking him about his
day - in short, showering on him all those little wifely attentions which so enchanted
him. Presently the Mattress reappeared with their wine. Old Mrs You said that she
did not want any and went off to bed. The two of them sat down together to drink it.
One of the two maids, who had now been persuaded to resume their duties, came
over from the kitchen to wait on them.
Meanwhile Jia Lian’s trusty servant Rich - the only attendant he had brought with
him on this visit - had been tying his master’s horse up in the stable. Finding another
horse there already, he was able on closer inspection to identify it and to deduce
what the Mattress by her whispering had attempted to conceal from him: viz., that
Cousin Zhen was somewhere on the premises. Sure enough, on going to the kitchen
when he had finished tying up the horse, he found two of Cousin Zhen’s pages,
Happy and Lively, sitting there drinking. They, too, when they saw him enter, realized
that both their masters must be present; but neither party was going to admit what
each knew the other one must know.
‘We couldn’t keep up with the master,’ said Happy and Lively, ‘and it was getting
too dark to go home, so we came here to beg a night’s shelter.’
‘There’s plenty of room here for you to sleep,’ said Rich expansively. ‘Make
yourselves at home. Actually I came here to bring the mistress her monthly
allowance. Now that I’ve given it to her, I think I shall spend the night here as well.’
‘Come and have a drink then,’ said Happy. ‘We’ve had a lot to drink already.’
Rich sat down and poured himself some wine; but before he could drink any, there
was a sound of neighing and trampling from the stable and he and Lively had to run
out and shout at the horses. The two animals sharing the same manger had taken a
dislike to each other and started kicking. It was only after a great deal of shouting and
whoaing that the pages succeeded in quieting them and tying them up on separate
sides of the stable.
While they were doing this, Happy was able to drink several more cups of wine, and
by the time they got back into the kitchen, he was already glassy-eyed. The Mattress
was evidently waiting for an opportunity to retire.
‘Well, boys,’ she said to them as they entered, ‘I’ll leave you to it then. I’ve made
you a pot of tea, so you can help yourselves. I’m going off to bed.’
The boys were reluctant to let her go, and there was a good deal of kissing and
fondling and noisy ribaldry before she finally succeeded in extricating herself. She
closed the door behind her as she went, and Rich and Lively proceeded to bar it on
the inside, preparatory to going to bed. When they went back to look at the kang,
however, they found Happy sprawled out in the middle of it, already fast asleep.
‘Come on, there’s a good chap, get up and lie down again properly!’ they said,
shaking him. ‘Don’t be so selfish! Where are we supposed to go?’
‘What about a bit of bum-cake?’ mumbled Happy, momen?tarily returning to
consciousness. ‘Turn and turn about. Fair shares for all.’
The others, seeing that he was too drunk to reason with, blew the lamp out and
settled themselves on either side of him as best they could.
The commotion in the stable had caused Er-jie’s apprehensiveness to return, but by
forcing herself to keep up a flow of chatter, she succeeded in distracting Jia Lian’s
attention away from it. So successful was she that, after a few more drinks, he began
to grow amorous and, having first sent the girl off with the dirty things, proposed
that they should bar the door for the night and begin undressing. Er-jie was beautiful
at any time, but in only a crimson shift, with her fashionable coiffure shaken out into
billowing black clouds and her face all soft and glowing with desire, she possessed an
extra dimension of beauty that was not revealed in the day?time. He hugged her to
him with a delighted laugh.
‘They’re always telling me how perfect that termagant wife of mine is,’ he said, ‘but
the way you look tonight, she’s not fit to carry your shoes!’
‘I may have looks, but I’ve got no class,’ said Et-jie. ‘Without class, one might just as
well not be good-looking.’
‘Why do you say that?’ said Jia Lian. ‘I don’t understand.’
‘You all treat me as if I were a fool,’ said Er-jie tearfully. ‘You think that I know
nothing-’
‘No!’
‘- but though we’ve only been married two months – ’
‘I know you’re not a fool!’ he insisted.
      ‘- though we’ve only been together for so short a time,’ she continued, ‘I already
feel that I’m yours completely and for ever, in this life or any life to come. Because
you are my husband, I shall always look up to you and never, never deceive you. My
future is assured. But what is to become of my sister? We can’t let things go on the
way they are at present. We must think of some permanent solution for her.’
Jia Lian laughed reassuringly.
‘Look, I’m not a jealous man. I know about your past and it doesn’t bother me. You
really mustn’t worry. I realize that now we are married you must feel awkward about
Cousin Zhen being here, but surely the solution would be for Cousin Zhen and your
sister to have a formal union and after that we can forget our inhibitions and make it
a foursome. What do you say to that?’
Er-jie wiped her eyes.
‘It’s very nice of you to suggest it, but I don’t know what the other two would think
of your idea. For one thing, my sister is such a funny girl. And for another, I don’t
know whether your cousin would like having everything dragged out into the open.’
‘It’ll be all right,’ said Jia Lian, ‘you see! I’ll go over and have it out with him now.
There’s no time like the present. It’s only a question of breaking the ice.’
He strode off, the bolder for being a little drunk, to the courtyard on the western side
of the compound. Light was streaming through the sitting-room window. He pushed
the door open and walked in.
‘Where’s the big chief, then?’ he cried. ‘Cousin, I’ve come to pay you my respects!’
Speechless with embarrassment, Cousin Zhen rose to his feet and motioned him
dumbly to a seat.
‘What’s this?’ said Jia Lian, noting his embarrassment. ‘After we’ve always been
such good friends, and after all you’ve done for me - because if I cut myself into a
million pieces, I still couldn’t begin to show you how grateful I am - you’re not, surely,
going to start feeling uneasy on my account? My dear coz, from this day on I want
you to carry on exactly as you used to in the past. Otherwise I shall give up any idea
of getting myself an heir and stop coming here altogether!’
He tried to kneel down at this point, but Cousin Zhen, who was becoming quite
frantic with embarrassment, quickly reached out to stop him.
‘All right, Lian,’ he said, ‘all right. Whatever you say, coz. I’ll be guided by you.’
‘Come on, let’s have some more wine!’ Jia Lian said to the servant-girl. ‘I’m going to
drink with my dear cousin.’ He turned to San-jie with a leer. ‘Why don’t you and my
dear cousin share a cup? You and Zhen drink a cup together and I’ll drink a cup to
your future happiness. To Zhen and San-jie!’
San-jie leaped to her feet and, pointing her finger at Jia Lian from where she stood on
the kang, fixed him with a withering look of contempt.
‘Don’t try the talking horse on me, my friend! If you two want to drink, I’ll watch
you drink. But count me out of it. People who work shadow-puppets should be
careful not to break the screen. You surely can’t be so stupid as to imagine that we
haven’t seen by now how things really stand in your household? If you and your
cousin thought that by spending a few taels of your stinking money you could buy my
sister and me for your whores, you were very much mistaken. You see, I know all
about your old woman and how scared you are of her. I know that it’s because of her
that when you married my sister you had to smuggle her out here like a man who’s
stolen a gong and doesn’t dare to play on it. Well, I should like to meet this Feng lady
and find out just how many heads and arms she’s got. If we can reach a satisfactory
agreement, well and good; but if there’s the slightest difficulty, I’m perfectly prepared
to take her on and fight it out with her single-handed. But before I do that, I promise
to have the liver and lights out of you two, or my name’s not “San-jie”! - You said you
wanted a drink, didn’t you? All right, I’ll drink with you.’
She picked up the wine-kettle and poured out a cupful of wine; then, having drunk
half of it herself, she threw an arm round Jia Lian’s neck and pressed the winecup to
his lips.
Jia Lian was shocked by this onslaught into instant soberness; and Cousin Zhen,
ill-prepared for such strident shrew?ishness by what had passed earlier in the
evening, was almost equally taken aback. The two of them, for all their boasted
experience, found themselves reduced to a condition of tongue-tied helplessness by
this single unmarried girl.
But San-jie had not finished with them yet.
‘Why don’t you ask my sister to join us?’ she asked. ‘If we’re going to have fun, let’s
all have fun together. “Home is handiest” as the proverb says. There are no outsiders
here. We’re all in the family. Come one, come all!’
Cousin Zhen was by now looking for an opportunity to leave, but San-jie was careful
to give him none. He had not suspected that she could be like this and deeply
regretted having come; but he could not simply walk out without giving offence to Jia
Lian.
Out of deliberate disregard for appearances she had taken off her hair-ornaments
and outer clothes, and from time to time as she spoke, the animated gestures with
which her words were accompanied caused the imperfectly-fastened crimson shift
she was wearing to gape open, revealing glimpses of leek-?green breast-binder and
snow-white flesh beneath; the red shoes that peeped out below her green drawers
were all the time tap-tapping or coming together in a manner that was anything but
ladylike, and her earrings bobbed to and fro like little swings. To her
brow’s dusky crown and lips incarnadine
the lamplight lent an added softness and brightness; and the wine she had drunk
gave her eyes, which were at all times sparkling and vivacious, an even more
irresistible allure. The two men were spellbound, and yet at the same time repelled.
Her looks and gestures were all that inflamed concupiscence could desire; but her
words and the very frankness of a provocation too brazen to be seductive kept them
at bay.
And a poor pair they made of it in a situation where something other than carnal
satisfaction was required of them. Not only was there none of that lively repartee
that might have been expected of men who prided themselves on their gallantry;
they could not produce so much as a single amusing remark between them and sat
there, as the effortless flow of talk continued to pour out of her, fascinated but
unresponding. Sometimes she abused them, called them names, said the most
outrageous things to them. It was as though the roles had been reversed - as though
she was the man and they were a pair of poor, simpering playthings whose services
she had paid for. And when she had had enough of playing with them, she dismissed
them ignominiously, bolted the door alter them, and went to bed.
From that time onwards, whenever one of the servants did some small thing to
displease her, she would launch into loud abuse of Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian and Jia Rong,
denouncing all three of them as swindlers, deceivers and oppressors of the widow
and the orphan.
Cousin Zhen, when he finally got back after that visit, was chary of exposing himself
again. Sometimes when San-jie felt in the mood, she would send one of the boys
round to summon him and he would visit her then gladly enough, for he still had
some small hope of winning her; but he was careful to behave himself when he did,
and to defer in everything to her wishes.
San-jie was a very peculiar young woman. She took a perverse pleasure in enhancing
her natural beauty by affecting a striking style of dress and by adopting every
conceivable kind of outrageously seductive attitude. The effect was that every male
who encountered her was smitten - not only the suscep?tible ones like Jia Lian and
Cousin Zhen, but those made of sterner stuff as well; yet all of them, after only a few
minutes in her company, felt their ardour extinguished and their advances repelled
by the reckless, forthright, almost insolent way in which she received them.
When her mother and sister took her to task for her cavalier treatment of the two
cousins, she told Er-jie she was ‘stupid’.
‘Why should that pair of precious rascals be allowed to ruin girls like us that are
worth a million of them and get away with it?’ she said. ‘They shan’t do so if I can
help it. Besides, that wife of Lian’s is a very dangerous woman. We’re all right for the
time being because she hasn’t found out yet about your marriage; but she will do
one of these days, and when that time comes she’s not going to sit still and do
nothing. There’s sure to be a most terrible row, and who knows which of us will come
out of it alive? It’s only fair that they should be made to jump a bit now. If we’re
going to end up with a bad name anyway, let’s at least get what we can out of them
while we’ve got the chance!’
Her mother and sister, seeing that it was useless to argue with her, left her alone.
San-jie certainly put her precept into practice. Her demands for special kinds of food,
for clothing, for jewellery became daily more extravagant and capricious. Given a
silver orna?ment she would express a desire for a gold one. If she had something
with pearls in it, she would like something with gems in it as well. While she was
eating the fatted goose, her mind was already contemplating the slaughter of the
duck. And woe betide the cook if anything was not quite to her taste! Over would go
dishes, table and all! Or, if a newly-made garment displeased her, no matter how
expensive the material, she would quickly reduce it to ribbons, using a pair of scissors
to aid the process and uttering a fresh malediction at every tear. Cousin Zhen, who,
having some time previ?ously exhausted the possibilities with Er-jie and grown
somewhat tired of her, had willingly yielded her up to Jia Lian and transferred his
attentions to her sister, now found that San-jie, far from proving the complaisant
mistress he had hoped for, was actually costing him a great deal of money - money,
moreover, on which there seemed little prospect of a return.
Nowadays when Jia Lian came he spent the whole of his time there with Er-jie and
scarcely dared venture from her room. Because of San-jie he too was beginning to
regret the situation into which he had got himself.
On the other hand Er-jie was so loving and so devoted to him; he found her so
sympathetic. In her gentleness, in the wifely submissiveness with which she insisted
on discussing everything with him before she would make any decision, she was ten
times better than Xi-feng. And in respect of looks, voice and deportment she was at
least five times better.
True, she was a fallen woman; and though she had repented, neither her reform nor
any other excellence could bring back her virtue. But that was what she said. Was it
not Jia Lian himself who repudiated it?
‘Everybody makes mistakes,’ he would say. ‘As long as you know that you were
wrong and don’t do it again, that’s all that matters.’
He refused to talk about the unchasteness of her past: her present goodness was
enough for him.
And so, his doubts forgotten, he would cleave to her more passionately than ever.
They were of one heart, one mind. He swore they should live and die together.
Xi-feng and Patience were banished totally from his thoughts.
Inevitably these pillow-sessions would end with Er-jie urging Jia Lian to do something
about her sister.
‘Why don’t you talk it over with Zhen and think of someone you both know of who
can marry her?’ she said on the last of these occasions. ‘She can’t stay here like this
indefin?itely. Sooner or later there will be trouble.’
‘I did talk to Zhen about it the other day,’ said Jia Lian, ‘but he couldn’t give up the
idea of keeping her for himself. I said to him, “That piece of meat is too hot for chaps
like us, Zhen. The rose is a very pretty flower, but you can get some nasty jabs from
its spines. You’ll never hold a girl like that down. Much better find a husband for her
and get her off your hands.” But he wouldn’t say “yes” and he wouldn’t say “no”: he
just hummed and hawed for a bit and left it at that. So what can I do?’
      ‘Don’t worry,’ said Er-jie. ‘We’ll speak to San-jie herself about it tomorrow. If we
can persuade her to agree in principle to a betrothal, it can be left to her to have it
out with Cousin Zhen herself. Once she has convinced him that he has nothing to
hope for, he will have to do something about finding her a husband.’
Next day Er-jie spent the morning preparing a little party for the four of them, and Jia
Lian, instead of going off as he usually did, deliberately stayed indoors. At about noon
Er-jie invited her sister over and, when she arrived, seated her next to their mother in
the place of honour. San-jie knew perfectly well what the subject of this meeting was
to be and, as the wine was going round for the third time, before her sister had had a
chance to broach it, she burst into tears and proceeded to do so herself.
      ‘I’m sure the only reason you have invited me here today, sister, is to give me a
lecture, but I’m not stupid and I don’t need to be nagged at as if I were a child. We all
know what happened in the past, and there is no point in dragging it up now. The
important thing is that as you are comfortably settled and Mamma’s future is now
assured, it’s time to start thinking about how I am to be disposed of. However, this
matrimony business is no children’s game: it’s a girl’s whole lifetime to the day she
dies that is decided by it. In the past, because we were so vulnerable and one could
never be sure what designs men might have on one, I deliberately acted in a
shameless manner in order to keep them at bay. Now I am willing to put all that
behind me and turn myself into a good and obedient wife. On one condition, though:
the man I marry has got to he somebody I know about and somebody who is to my
liking. If I leave the choice to you, I am sure you will do your best to find someone
rich and well-placed and good-looking, but if it is someone I cannot give my heart to,
I shall feel that the whole of my life has been wasted.’
      Jia Lian smiled reassuringly.
      ‘That’s easy. We leave the choice entirely to you. Just name the man and we will
take care of the expenses. Your mother will have nothing to worry about.’
      ‘I don’t need to name him,’ said San-jie. ‘Er-jie has known about him all along.’
      ‘Who is it?’ Jia Lian asked, turning to Er-jie; but Er-jie could not for the moment
think who her sister had in mind.
      ‘I know who it is!’ Jia Lian clapped his hands delightedly, suddenly convinced
that he had thought of the right answer. ‘And a very good choice too!’ he added.
      ‘Who?’ said Er-jie.
      ‘No one else could ever be good enough for her. It has to be Bao-yu.’
      Er-jie and Mrs You felt sure that he was right, but San-jie herself repudiated the
suggestion indignantly.
      ‘I suppose you think that if we were ten sisters instead of only three, every one
of us would have to marry a Jia. There are other males in the world besides the ones
in your family, you know.’
      The other three were nonplussed. If it was not Bao-yu that she had in mind,
then who could it be?
      ‘Don’t just look under your noses,’ said San-jie. ‘Try casting your mind back five
years, sister.’
      But at that point Joker arrived, one of Jia Lian’s most trusted pages and sharer of
his secrets.
      ‘Sir She has been asking for you, sir,’ said Joker. ‘I told him that you’d gone off to
Sir Wang’s and then hurried here as quickly as I could to let you know.’
      ‘Were they asking about me at home yesterday?’ Jia Lian sounded a trifle
concerned.
      ‘I told the mistress that you were at the family temple discussing arrangements
for the Hundred Days with Mr Zhen and thought you might not be able to get back.’
      Jia Lian called for his horse to be led out and set off immediately, with Rich in
attendance. Joker was left behind at the disposal of the women. Er-jie had two plates
of food and a large cup of wine set down on the edge of the kang beside him and
invited him to eat and drink standing, while she asked him a few questions. In fact
she asked him a great many. How old was Xi-feng? In what way was she so awful?
How old was Grandmother Jia? How many girls were there? And so on. Joker, smiling
broadly, proceeded, between large sips of wine, to give the old lady and her two
daughters a detailed expose of the Rong mansion and its inhabitants.
      ‘I’m one of the boys from the inner gate,’ he told them. ‘I belong to one of two
groups of four. We work there by shifts. One group goes on duty as the other one
comes off. Of us eight, some, like me, are in the master’s confidence, some are in the
mistress’s. Those of us who are in the master’s confidence daren’t say a word to
upset the mistress’s boys; but she can say or do whatever she likes to us. You want to
know what she’s like? A cruel heart and a sharp tongue, that about sums her up. The
master’s no softy, but he can do nothing with her. There’s a Miss Patience working for
her though. She’s very nice. Though she’s so well in with the mistress, she’ll often do
you a kindness behind her back. When one of us boys is in trouble, the mistress will
be down on us like a ton of bricks, but if we can get Patience to put in a word for us,
we know we shall be all right. Everyone hates the mistress. The only exceptions are
Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship. The others pretend to like her, because they’re
afraid. She knows she hasn’t got any rivals and she always takes very good care to
keep both Their Ladyships happy, so consequently whatever she says goes, nobody
else dares stand up to her. She’s a great one for saving. She must have saved a
mountain of money by now. That’s why Their Ladyships are always saying what a
good manager she is. They don’t realize how much we servants have to suffer so that
she can take the credit. Whenever anything good happens, you can be sure that
she’ll get in with the news first, before anyone else does, so that she can reap the
benefit. But when things go wrong or she’s made a slip herself, she’ll very quickly
step aside and fasten the blame for it on someone else. She’ll even fan the flames up
and make it hotter for that other person once she’s safely out of it herself. Even her
mother-in-law can’t stand her. “The magpie looking for a bigger nest who set up
house with the crow” she calls her. She says she’s no business meddling with the
affairs of our household when she ought to be looking after her own. She says if it
weren’t for Her Old Ladyship, she’d have ordered her back long ago and made her
stay where she belongs.’
      Er-jie laughed.
      ‘If you say things like this behind her back, what must you say behind mine? In
my case there are even more things to criticize!’
       Joker fell on his knees, protesting.
       ‘If I ever said a word against you, madam, I should deserve to be struck by
lightning! It would have been a great blessing for all of us if the master had married
you first instead of the mistress. I know there would have been fewer beatings and
cursings for us boys and we shouldn’t have had to go around the way we do in fear
and trembling all the time. There isn’t a boy among us who isn’t every day and
everywhere singing your praises and saying what a kind and considerate lady you are.
We are planning to ask the master to let us stay here and serve you all the time.’
       ‘Get up, get up!’ said Er-jie, laughing. ‘Little imperti?nence! I was only joking;
how easily you are scared! I’m sure I don’t know what you should want to come here
for. I am thinking of going to see your mistress.’
       Joker waved his hand in vigorous disapproval.
       ‘Don’t do that, madam, whatever you do! It would be much better if you never
set eyes on her as long as you live. She’s “soft of tongue and hard of heart”, “two
faces and three knives”, she’ll “give you a smile and trip you up the while”, she’s “a
welcoming fire when you see her, but a stab in the back when it’s dark” - all those
things and more. I don’t think even Miss You here could get the better of her in an
argument, so I’m sure a quiet, gentle lady like you would be no match for her.’
       Er-jie smiled.
‘If I behave correctly towards her, I don't see why she should do me any harm.’
‘Listen, madam,’ said Joker. ‘I'm not saying this to you because I’ve had too much to
drink, but when she sees that you are both prettier and more popular than she is,
she’s not going to let matters rest. They call jealous people “vinegar bottles”, don't
they? Well, she’s not just a bottle-full of vinegar; she’s a storage-jar - a whole
cistern-full of it! The master’s only got to rest his eyes on one of the maids, and she’ll
find occasion to have that poor girl beaten until she looks like a boiled sheep’s head.
Miss Patience is supposed to be his chamber-wife, but I doubt she lets him sleep with
her more than once in a year. And even then she’ll go on and on about it afterwards
until she’s reduced Patience to tears. “I didn't want to do it,” says Patience, “you
made me. When I said I didn’t want to, you told me I was wicked and dis?obedient,
but now that I've done it, you keep picking on me.” After that she makes it up with
Patience and begs to be forgiven.’
‘That can't be true,’ said Er-jie. ‘If she's really the harpy you say she is, how could
she possibly be frightened of a mere chamber-wife?’
‘Because Patience has reason on her side,’ said Joker. ‘It’s like the proverb says:
“Three men with a carrying-pole can't shift Reason from its place.” Patience has been
with the mistress since she was a little girl. There were four maids that came with the
mistress when she married, but only Patience stayed on with her. The other three
either died or got married. The mistress gave her to the master to be his
chamber-wife partly because she wanted to show everyone what a virtuous wife she
was and partly because she thought it would be a way of binding him to her. Miss
Patience is a really good sort. She’s not the sort of person to go looking for trouble,
and she’s always been good and true to the mistress. That’s why the mistress always
makes it up with her.’
‘I see,’ said Er-jie. ‘But haven’t I heard that there are a young widow and a number
of young ladies in the family? If your mistress is as awful as you say she is, how comes
it that these other ones let her get away with it?’
Joker clapped his hands together and laughed.
‘Because the “young widow” you're talking about – that’s our Mrs Zhu - is a Saint.
The nickname we servants give her is “Lady Gwanyin”. She doesn’t as a rule have
anything to do with household matters. She spends all her time teaching the young
ladies writing and broidering and book-learning. That’s her job. She has done a bit of
household managing since the mistress fell ill, but even now she doesn’t interfere
very much: just follows the rules, very quiet and ladylike - no throwing her weight
about or showing off how clever she is like the other one. Of the young ladies, the
eldest one - well, I suppose she must be a good ’un to have been so favoured. The
second one - that's the master's sister - we call her “Miss Doddyblock”. She’d
probably forget to say “oh” if you stuck a pin in her. The third - Master Bao’s younger
sister - we call “The Rose” –’
‘Why do you call her that?’ the You sisters asked simultaneously.
‘Sweet and pretty and everyone loves her, but she has a thorn,’ said Joker. ‘The
great pity about her is that she’s not Her Ladyship’s child. A phoenix reared in a
crow’s nest, that’s what she is. The fourth young lady is really Mr Zhen’s sister, but
Her Ladyship brought her over to our mansion when she was still a baby and brought
her up there with the others. She’s a big girl now, but still pays no attention to what
goes on around her, no more than the second one. Then besides our four there are
two other young ladies that you probably won’t have heard about - both very, very
beautiful. One is Sir Zheng’s sister’s child. Her name is Miss Lin. Though she’s so
beautiful, sh’'s very thin and weakly. The other is Her Ladyship’s sister’s child. Her
name is Miss Xue.’
‘Miss Wood and Miss Snow,’ said Er-jie, smiling.
‘If we ever meet them on their way through the courtyard or getting into their
carriages when they go out,’ said Joker, ‘we none of us dare to breathe.’
‘Of course,’ said Er-jie. ‘A great household like yours is sure to be very strict about
such matters. Though young boys like you would be allowed into the courtyards, you
would naturally be expected to keep your distance when the young ladies are about.’
     ‘No, no, no,’ said Joker, waving his hand energetically. ‘That’s not the reason
we’re afraid to breathe. We’re afraid that if we breathed out too hard, we might blow
Miss Lin over and cause Miss Xue to melt!’
     The three You ladles, the Mattress and the two maids all burst out laughing.
     But who was it that San-jie wanted to marry? This will be revealed (if you want
to know) in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 66

Shame drives a warm-hearted young woman
to take her life
And shock leads a cold-hearted young gentleman
to renounce the world



Our last chapter concluded with Joker’s female audience laughing at the notion of
Miss Wood’s being blown down and Miss Snow melted by the breathing-out of the
pages. The Mattress dealt him a playful box on the ear.
‘There may be some truth in what you say; but your way of telling things turns even
good sense into nonsense,’ she said. ‘You are more like one of Bao-yu’s boys than
one of the Master’s.’
Er-jie was about to ask another question, but San-jie got in first.
‘Yes now, about Bao-yu: what does he do - apart from going to school?’
Joker laughed.
‘Don’t ask about him, Miss! You’d never believe half of it if I told you. To begin with,
although he’s such a big fellow now, he’s never had what you might call a proper
schooling. Everyone in the family since his great-grandfather’s time, including the
Master, had to do their ten years in the family school; but not him. Bao-yu doesn’t
like study; so because he is Her Old Ladyship’s darling, that’s that. Sir Zheng used to
try and do something with him, but that was soon put a stop to by Her Old Ladyship.
Nowadays he spends the whole of his time just fooling around. You can’t understand
what he’s talking about half the time, and you can’t make any sense of what he does.
He looks bright enough, and people always assume from his looks that he must be
clever; but underneath it he’s stupid. You can tell he must be stupid from the fact
that he never has a word to say for himself when he meets anyone. I’ll give him this,
though: although he doesn’t go to school, he can write a bit. That’s about the only
thing he’s any good at. He doesn’t study, he doesn’t care for physical training, and he
doesn’t like meeting people. He just spends all his time playing around with a pack of
maids. He’s soft, too. Sometimes when he sees us, if he’s in the mood, he’ll play with
us as if he were an equal. Other times he ignores us and we ignore him. If we’re
sitting down or lying down when he comes by, we don’t get up for him; we just take
no notice. He doesn’t care. Nobody’s afraid of him. We do just what we like when
he’s around. He never stops us.’
‘You talk like this about someone who is easy-going with you,’ said San-jie, ‘yet you
complain just as much about someone who is strict. One can see that you are
difficult people to employ!’
‘I always thought Bao-yu looked so nice,’ said Er-jie. ‘How disappointing to learn
that there is really nothing in him after all!’
‘You surely don’t believe the rubbish this boy has been talking, sister?’ said San-jie
impatiently. ‘We have, after all, seen Bao-yu several times ourselves. I suppose you
could call him effeminate. Whether he is eating or talking or moving about, there is
certainly something rather girlish about his manner. That comes from spending
nearly all his time in the women’s quarters with no other males around. But stupid? I
hardly think he can be called that. Don’t you remember when we were still in
mourning, that time we were standing watching the monks as they went round the
coffin and he stood right in front of us? Everyone said how ill-mannered it was of him
and how inconsiderate. But then afterwards he quietly came up to us and explained:
“I hope you didn’t think it very inconsiderate of me to stand in front of you like that,”
he said, “but I noticed how dirty some of those monks were and I was afraid that the
smell of them might distress you.” Then shortly after that, when he was drinking
some tea and you said you’d like some too, he stopped one of the old women from
emptying the slops out of his cup and filling it up again for you. “No, no,” he said,
“that’s dirty! You must wash it first before you pour her any.” Just on the strength of
those two incidents I think you ought in fairness to agree that, when he is with girls
at any rate, he is perfectly capable. People fail to find out what he is really like
because they are put off by his manner.’
‘To hear you speak, it sounds as if the two of you would get on very well together,’
said Er-jie. ‘I think we ought to betroth you to him. Why not?’
San-jie was prevented from answering by Joker’s presence. She merely looked down
and occupied herself by cracking a melon-seed between her teeth.
‘They’d make a fine pair,’ said Joker, ‘whether from the point of view of looks or of
character. The only thing is, he’s got someone else already. Although it hasn’t been
made official yet, it’s as good as certain that he’s going to marry Miss Lin. The reason
they haven’t been properly engaged yet is because Miss Lin is so often ill, and also
because they are still a bit on the young side; but two or three years from now, as
soon as Her Old Ladyship gives the word, they are sure to be.’
They were still discussing this when Rich arrived with a message from Jia Lian.
‘Sir She is sending the Master to Ping-an in a few days’ time on important secret
business. He’ll probably be away for fifteen or sixteen days. He can’t come back here
tonight, but he says, Mrs You, will you and the Mistress get that business you know
about settled, so that when he comes tomorrow, he’ll know what he has to do?’
Having delivered this message, he went back again, taking Joker with him. Er-jie had
the gate closed after them and retired early for the night, a good part of which she
spent in extracting the required information from her sister.
Jia Lian did not arrive until after noon next day. Er-jie expressed concern that he had
come at all.
‘If you have something important to do, you don’t need to put yourself in a rush by
coming here. I should hate to be the cause of your starting late.’
‘It isn’t anything really important,’ said Jia Lian, ‘just a job that needs doing which
happens to be rather far away. I shall have to leave by the beginning of next month
and it will be about half a month before I get back.’
‘Well, while you are away, just concentrate on the job,’ said Er-jie. ‘You don’t have
to worry about anything here. We shall be perfectly all right. San-jie isn’t the sort of
girl to change her mind overnight and she has definitely chosen her man now. I think
you will have to go along with her choice.’
‘Ah yes,’ said Jia Lian. ‘Who is it?’
‘Someone who may not be available at present, in which case it’s anyone’s guess
when he will be back,’ she smiled. ‘I must admit, she has a very good eye. And she
says that she is prepared to wait as long as it will take - ten years if neces?sary. If by
any chance he’s dead or for some reason or other can’t ever come, she says she will
cut her hair off and become a nun. She would rather spend the rest of her life in
prayer and fasting than marry anyone else.’
‘Well, come on!’ said Jia Lian. ‘Who is this person who has made such a powerful
impression on her?’
‘It’s a long story,’ said Er-jie. ‘Five years ago my mother took us both with her to her
old home for my grandmother’s birthday. The family had invited a troupe of amateur
actors for the occasion, all young men of good family. The one who played the junior
male lead was called Liu Xiang-lian. He is the only man my sister is prepared to marry.
Last year he got himself into some sort of trouble and had to go into hiding, and we
don’t know whether he’s out of it yet or not.’
‘So that’s who it is!’ said Jia Lian. ‘No wonder she is so keen. Yes, she certainly has a
good eye. There’s something you probably don’t know about him, though. Young Liu
is a very handsome young man, but he’s an awfully cold fish. He has very few real
friends. Bao-yu is probably the person he gets on best with. He took himself off
somewhere or other last year after beating up that oaf Xue Pan - I suppose because
he wanted to avoid meeting us. I haven’t seen him since then. Someone did tell me
that they’d heard he was back, but it may have been only a rumour. I can easily find
out by asking one of Bao-yu’s pages. - But suppose it is only a rumour. He’s such a
rolling stone, it may be years before he comes back again. Won’t it be rather a waste
for her to put off marrying for so long?’
‘When our San-jie says she’s going to do something, she does it,’ said Er-jie. ‘I think
you will have to go along with her.’
They were interrupted at this point by San-jie herself, who had evidently been
listening to their conversation and chose this moment to come into the room.
‘Set your mind at rest, brother-in-law. I am not one of those people who say one
thing and mean another; I really do mean what I say. If Liu turns up, I shall marry him.
From now on and until he does I shall spend all my time praying, fasting and looking
after Mamma. If he has still not turned up when Mamma is no longer here to look
after, I shall go into a convent.’
She drew a jade hairpin from her hair and deliberately broke it in two.
‘So be it with me if I do not do exactly as I have sworn!’
She went straight back to her room then; and from that day onwards her conduct
was indeed exemplary.
Jia Lian could see that he had no choice but to fall in with her wishes, and after a
brief discussion of domestic matters with Er-jie, went home for further discussions
with Xi-feng about the preparations for his journey. While at home he sent someone
to ask Tealeaf about Liu Xiang-lian.
‘I’m afraid I don’t know,’ said Tealeaf. ‘I should think he probably hasn’t come back
yet. If he had, I should almost certainly have got to hear about it.’
Inquiries made among Xiang-lian’s neighbours confirmed that he had not returned.
Jia Lian was obliged to report back to Er-jie that he had drawn a blank.
A little before he was due to begin his journey, Jia Lian took leave of Xi-feng and the
family, but only in order to spend his last two nights with Er-jie. He found San-jie so
altered on this visit as to seem almost a different person. Er-jie, too, showed herself
so careful and competent in her manage?ment of the little household that he could
see there would be no need to worry about either of them while he was away.
Jia Lian left the city early on the day of his departure and thereafter followed the
main road to Ping-an, putting up at some staging-post or hostelry each night and
making shorter stops for meals and refreshments during the day. After two days of
uneventful travelling he came, on the third day, upon a little caravan moving towards
him along the road ahead consisting of a number of pack-animals and some ten or so
horsemen, of whom the leading two appeared to be masters and the rest servants.
As they drew near enough for him to make out their faces, Jia Lian saw with
astonishment that the two leading horsemen were Xue Pan and Liu Xiang-lian and
urged his horse forwards to meet them. After greetings and the customary
generalities had been exchanged, the three of them went into a near-by inn to sit
down together and talk. Jia Lian asked the question that had been puzzling him.
‘After your little incident last year, the rest of us were anxious to make it up
between you, but young Liu seemed to have disappeared without a trace. How do
you come to be together now?’
‘It’s a very strange story,’ said Xue Pan. ‘My boys and I finished selling our stuff off
in the spring and we’ve been on our homeward journey ever since. Everything was
going quite smoothly until a couple of days ago. Then just as we were approaching
Ping-an, we ran into a gang of robbers who took away all our things. But just at that
very moment up pops young Xiang-lian out of nowhere, drives off the robbers, gets
all our stuff back for us, and saves our lives. He refused to let me thank him, but in
the end he agreed that we should become blood-brothers. We’ve been travelling
together ever since. From now on we’re going to be just like real brothers to each
other. He’s leaving me at the next crossroads and going off sixty or seventy miles
south of here to look up an aunt of his, while I go on ahead to the capital. When I’ve
settled my own affairs, I’m going to find a new house for him and fix him up with a
nice little wife, and we’re both going to settle down and be family men.’
‘I see,’ said Jia Lian. ‘Well, I’m glad to hear it. It’s a pity we had all that worry for
nothing.’
He paused a moment before continuing.
‘You said something a moment ago about finding young Liu a wife. I happen to
know of someone who would suit him perfectly.’
He proceeded to tell the other two about his own marriage to Er-jie and how they
were anxious to find a husband for her younger sister, omitting to mention, of course,
that San-jie had chosen Liu Xiang-lian herself.
‘Don’t say anything about this to the others when you get home,’ he told Xue Pan.
‘I’m waiting until we have a son. I shall tell them about it then.’
Xue Pan seemed delighted.
‘High time, too!’ he said. ‘Cousin Feng is to blame for not giving you one.’
‘There you go again!’ said Xiang-lian, laughing. ‘You mustn’t say things like that to
people. Better keep your big mouth shut!’
Xue Pan obediently fell silent, merely observing, before he did so:
‘We ought to take Lian up on his suggestion, though.’
‘I’d always set my heart on marrying a stunningly beautiful girl,’ said Xiang-lian.
‘However, since you both recom?mend this one, I’m prepared to lower my
expectations a bit. Yes, all right, Mr Jia. I leave it to you to arrange this, then. I put
myself in your hands.’
‘I don’t ask you to believe this now,’ said Jia Lian, smiling. ‘You’ll be able to judge for
yourself when you see her: but this sister-in-law of mine is a stunningly beautiful girl.
I should go so far as to say she must be one of the most beautiful women who have
ever lived.’
Xiang-lian brightened.
‘All right, then. Shall we fix it up when I get back to the capital in about a month’s
time, when I have finished seeing my aunt?’
‘If you and I were the only ones involved, I would gladly leave it at that,’ said Jia
Lian, ‘but knowing how unpredictable your movements are, I can’t help feeling a little
nervous on the girl’s behalf. Suppose you failed to turn up? It could mean a whole
lifetime wasted. I think you ought to give me some sort of pledge.’
‘A gentleman’s word ought to be pledge enough,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘In any case, I’m
always hard up; I’m not in a position to give you a betrothal gift - particularly when I
am on the road like this, away from home.’
‘There’s all my stuff at your disposal,’ said Xue Pan. ‘Help yourself. Give him a share
of that.’
‘It isn’t money or jewellery I’m after,’ said Jia Lian. ‘It doesn’t have to be anything
valuable. Just give me something you carry about with you that I can take back with
me as a token.’
‘At all events, I can’t give you this sword,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘I need it for self-defence.
I have got another sword in my luggage I could let you have - well, two swords, really:
it’s a pair of swords in one scabbard, what they call a “Duck and Drake” sword. It’s a
family heirloom. I never use it, but I always carry it around with me. I could never
bear to be parted from it for long, so however much I may wander, if you take that as
my pledge, you can be sure of my eventually coming back to get it.’
He handed Jia Lian the heirloom when he had got it out of his bundle, and after a few
more drinks the three men remounted, took leave of each other, and went their
separate ways.
*
In due course Jia Lian arrived at Ping-an and saw the Military Governor, only to be
told that the business he had come about could not be dealt with satisfactorily until
some time in the tenth month. As there was no point in staying, he started back the
very next day for the capital, calling in first at Er-jie’s place on his arrival.
Er-jie had run the little household during his absence with exemplary circumspection.
The courtyard gate had been kept shut and bolted all day and she had received no
outside visitors. San-jie, too - a young woman who never did anything by halves - had
continued as good as her word. When not actually keeping to her own room, she had
spent the whole of the time either ministering to the wants of her mother or sitting
and sewing with Er-jie. Jia Lian was gratified to find all these signs of prudent
housekeeping on his return and his respect for Er-jie’s wifely virtues increased.
When the greetings and routine questionings were over, he told the sisters about his
encounter with Liu Xiang-lian, and getting the Duck and Drake swords out of his
luggage, he handed them to San-jie to take care of. San-jie first examined the
scabbard. It was embossed with a design of interlacing dragons and sea-monsters
and encrusted all over with jewels. Then she took out the swords, identical except
that one had the character ‘Duck’ and the other the character Drake’ engraved on its
blade. And what blades! Cold, cruel; glittering with the cold brightness of autumn
waters. San-jie was enraptured by them. She put them both back into their scabbard
and carried them off to her own room, where she hung them up over her bed.
Thereafter she would look up at them from time to time and smile, happy in the
knowledge that now her future was assured.
After a couple of nights with Er-jie, Jia Lian went back to Rong-guo House to report to
his father and to rejoin the other members of the family. He found Xi-feng with the
rest. She had by now recovered sufficiently to get about and had resumed her duties
as household manager. As soon as he could, he went to see Cousin Zhen and tell him
about San-jie and Liu Xiang-lian. Cousin Zhen was lately much taken up with a new
acquaintance and had lost his former interest in the You sisters. He therefore
received Jia Lian’s news with equanimity and seemed perfectly content to leave the
matter in his hands, merely insisting on himself contributing thirty taels towards the
expenses, since he feared that Jia Lian’s resources might be inadequate. Jia Lian
accepted the money and handed it to Er-jie to spend on San-jie’s trousseau.
Round about the middle of the eighth month Xiang-lian arrived back in the capital
and at once went to pay his respects to Aunt Xue and make the acquaintance of Xue
Ke. He was told that Xue Pan had been ill in bed almost since the day he got back
(some sickness brought on by change of water or the effects of travel) and was still
under doctor’s treatment. However, on hearing that Xiang-lian had come, Xue Pan
insisted on having him brought into his bedroom. He and his mother, whose earlier
resentment against Xiang-lian had been completely banished by her gratitude to him
for saving her son’s life, spoke eloquently of their indebtedness, and when the
conversation turned to the subject of Xiang-lian’s marriage, they insisted that all the
material things required for it should be supplied by them, so that he should have
nothing to do himself except name the day. It was now Xiang-lian’s turn to be
grateful.
Next day Xiang-lian went to see Bao-yu. The two of them were always wonderfully at
ease in each other’s company and Xiang-lian felt sufficiently intimate to ask him
confidentially about the circumstances of Jia Lian’s second marriage.
‘I really don’t know - beyond what Tealeaf has told me,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I haven’t been
to see them. I don’t really think it’s my business. Tealeaf mentioned that Cousin Lian
was very anxious to see you about something, but I don’t know what it was.’
Xiang-lian told him about the various things that had happened to him on his travels,
ending up with an account of his encounter with Jia Lian.
‘Congratulations!’ said Bao-yu. ‘You are a lucky man. She’s a ravishingly beautiful
girl. The perfect match for a good-looking chap like you!’
‘If she is so beautiful,’ said Xiang-lian, ‘there can be no shortage of suitors wanting
to marry her. Why should your cousin pick on me? I’ve never been particularly
friendly with him in the past - certainly not to that extent - yet when I met him on
this journey, he was so pressing, so insistent that I should give him a definite
undertaking to marry her. What am I to make of it? It’s almost as if the girl’s family
was doing the pursuing. I can’t help feeling very dubious about the whole affair. I
wish I hadn’t given him those swords. I thought of you as the person most likely to be
able to help me get to the bottom of this business.’
‘For a person so intelligent you have left it a bit late to start feeling dubious now
that you have promised to marry the girl and already given them your pledge,’ said
Bao-yu. ‘You started off by saying that you wanted to marry a beauty. Now that
you’ve got one, why not leave it at that? Why these suspicions?’
‘You said just now you didn’t even know about her sister’s marriage,’ said Xiang-lian.
‘How do you know she is so beautiful?’
‘I saw her practically every day for a month at Ning-guo House when she and her
sister were brought there by Cousin Zhen’s mother-in-law,’ said Bao-yu. ‘How could I
fail to know? Ravishingly beautiful. Obviously made for you. You San-jie, you see:
even the name makes her yours!’
Xiang-lian stamped impatiently.
‘And everyone else’s, no doubt.’ Bao-yu’s execrable pun had not amused him. ‘It
won’t do. This is a thoroughly bad business. The only clean things about that
Ning-guo House are the stone lions that stand outside the gate. The very cats and
dogs there are corrupted!’
Bao-yu reddened, and Xiang-lian, realizing that he had gone too far, began pumping
his bands apologetically.
‘I’m sorry, I shouldn’t have said that. - But surely you can tell me something about
her character?’
‘Since you appear to know already, I don’t quite see the point,’ said Bao-yu wryly.
‘In any case, perhaps I’m none too clean myself.’
‘What I said was spoken in the heat of the moment,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘You mustn’t
take it to heart.’
‘I’ve already forgotten it,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If you go on talking about it, you will make it
seem that the one who has taken it to heart is you.’
Xiang-lian pumped his hands again and took his leave. He was still thoroughly
unhappy about the whole affair. At first he thought of going back to Xue Pan and
talking it over with him; then he changed his mind, partly because Xue Pan was ill but
mainly because in any case he had little confidence in his judgement. In the end he
decided that perhaps the best thing would be simply to ask for his pledge back. Once
he had made up his mind, he decided to tackle Jia Lian about it immediately. He
found him at Er-jie’s place.
Jia Lian, delighted to hear that Xiang-lian had already come to call, came hurrying out
to meet him and conducted him to the inside sitting-room to introduce him to his
future mother-in-law. He was somewhat surprised when Xiang-lian merely bowed to
the old lady instead of making her a kotow and addressed her formally as ‘Mrs You’.
The significance of this became apparent presently when tea was served and
Xiang-lian came at once to the point.
‘I am afraid that when I met you recently on my travels I acted far too hastily. I
didn’t know at the time, hut it seems that my aunt had already in the fourth month
chosen another girl to be my wife. When she told me about it, there was obviously
nothing I could say. To hold to my agreement with you would have meant disobeying
my aunt, and that of course is out of the question. Now, if the pledge I gave you had
been gold or silk or something of that sort, I should simply have forgotten about it;
but those swords I gave you were a family heirloom left me by my grandfather, so I’m
afraid I shall very regretfully have to ask you for them back.’
Jia Lian was unable to take this calmly.
‘Now look here, young Liu, this won’t do, you know! A pledge is a pledge. The
whole idea of it is to guard against people having second thoughts like this. An
engagement to marry isn’t something you can just jump into and out of at will. I’m
afraid what you are proposing is quite impossible.’
Xiang-lian smiled patiently.
‘No doubt you are in the right, and I am perfectly prepared for you to reproach me;
but I’m afraid I cannot go through with this marriage under any circumstances.’
Jia Lian seemed about to argue, but Xiang-lian frustrated him by rising to his feet.
‘Could we go and discuss this somewhere else, please? It isn’t very convenient,
talking about it in here.’
You San-jie had been able to hear the whole of this conversation quite clearly from
her room. She had waited so long for Xiang-lian, and now that at last he had come,
he was re?jecting her. It must be because of something he had heard about her in
the Jia mansion. He probably thought of her as a shame?less wanton, the sort of
woman who throws herself at men, unworthy to be his wife. If she allowed the two
men to go off together, there was little likelihood that Jia Lian could do anything to
stop him breaking off the engagement; and even if he tried arguing with him, the
probable outcome would only be further damage to her reputation. As soon,
therefore, as she heard Jia Lian agreeing to go outside with him, she snatched the
swords down from the wall, and having first drawn out the Duck and hidden it
behind her back, she hurried into the sitting-room to see them.
‘There is no need for you to go out and discuss anything,’ she said. ‘Here is your
pledge back.’
The tears were pouring down her cheeks like rain. She held out the scabbard with the
single sword in it in her left hand. As Xiang-lian took it, she whipped the other sword
out with her right hand and slashed it across her throat. It was all over in a moment.
Red scatter of broken blossoms, and the jade column fallen, Never to rise again ...
The terrified servants made futile attempts to resuscitate her, but she was already
dead. Old Mrs You wept and screamed, breaking off from time to time to inveigh
against Xiang-lian as a murderer. Jia Lian seized hold of Xiang-lian and called for
someone to bring a rope, intending to tie him up and take him to the yamen; but
Er-jie checked her weeping and did her best to dissuade him.
‘He didn’t force her to do it, it was her own decision. What good will taking him to
the yamen do? We don’t want a public scandal on top of everything else. Much
better let him go.’
Jia Lian, whose resolution seemed temporarily to have deserted him, let go of
Xiang-lian automatically: but Xiang-lian made no attempt to escape.
‘I didn’t know she was like this,’ he said, weeping. ‘She had a noble heart. It wasn’t
my luck to have her.’
He lifted up his own voice then and wept, as if he had been weeping for his bride. He
stayed with the family until the coffin had been bought and San-jie laid inside it; and
when the lid was closed over her, he threw himself on it and clung to it for a long
time weeping. Only then did he take leave of them, walking alone out of the gate,
blinded by his tears and scarcely knowing where he was going.
As he walked along in a daze, his thoughts full of San-jie’s rare combination of beauty
and resoluteness which he had so wantonly rejected, one of Xue Pan’s little pages
came looking for him to take him to his new house. Xiang-lian was too distracted to
pay the boy much attention and allowed himself to be led there by the hand. It was a
pleasant, well-appointed little house While he and the page stood waiting in the
sitting-room, he heard a little tinkling noise - the sound made by the girdle-gems of a
hurrying woman - and San-jie came into it from outside. She had the Duck cradled in
her right arm. Her left hand was holding some sort of album or ledger.
‘I loved you for five years,’ she said. (The tears were still running down her cheeks.)
‘I did not know that your heart was as cold as your face. It was a foolish love, and I
have paid for it with my life. Now I am ordered to go to the Fairy Disenchantment’s
tribunal in the Land of Illusion to keep the records of the other lovers who are under
her jurisdiction. But I could not bear to leave without seeing you just once more
before I go. After this I shall never see you again.’
She began to go, but Xiang-lian wanted to question her and tried to stop her going.
She spoke again, but this time it sounded more like an incantation.
‘From love I came; from love I now depart. I wasted my life for love, and now that I
have woken up, I am ashamed of my folly. From now on we are nothing to each other,
you and I - nothing.’
A little gust of wind with a faint fragrance on it seemed to blow past him as she
uttered these last words, and the very next moment she had vanished.
Xiang-lian came to himself with a start, uncertain whether or not he had been
dreaming. He could see no sign of Xue Pan’s little page when he looked about him,
and the new house had turned into a dilapidated temple. Not far from him a Taoist
with a crippled leg sat catching and killing his lice. Xiang-lian got up and went over to
him.
‘What is this place, holy one?’ he asked, having first clasped his hands and knocked
them against his forehead in the ap?propriate salutation. ‘And may I know whom I
have the honour of addressing?’
The Taoist chuckled.
‘I don’t know where this place is any more than you do. Nor who I am. It is a place
where I am resting a little while before going on elsewhere.’
It felt to Xiang-lian as if a douche of icy water had penetrated him to the bone with
its coldness. He understood. Without a moment’s hesitation he drew the
companionless Drake out of its scabbard, stretched out his queue, slashed through
                    … the unnumbered strands,
That bind us to the world and its annoys,
and as soon as the Taoist was ready, followed him out into the world. But where the
two of them went to, I have no idea. Other information apart from that will be
available in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 67

Frowner sees something that
makes her homesick
And Xi-feng hears something that
rouses her suspicions



The grief occasioned in old Mrs You, Er-jie, Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian by San-jie’s
suicide can be imagined. It long outlasted her burial outside the city walls, which
took place shortly after the encoffining. As for Liu Xiang-lian, the human repinings
felt by that somewhat cold young man when he realized the value of what he had
lost were brought to an abrupt end (as we have shown) by the even colder words of
the Taoist, which, by breaking through the Barrier of Confusion and opening his eyes
to the vanity of human affections, caused him to renounce the world by symbolically
severing his hair and following the mad holy man in his wanderings. The direction
these took them in is unknown, as we stated in the previous chapter. Let us leave
them and see how others were affected by these events.
Aunt Xue had been delighted by the news of Xiang-lian’s betrothal to You San-jie. The
wedding would give her an opportunity of demonstrating her gratitude to him for
saving her son’s life. She was excitedly planning for this event - discussing the
purchase of a house and furniture, selecting a date, making arrangements for the
ceremony and so forth - when one of the household boys came in with the appalling
news that San-jie had cut her throat and Xiang-lian decided to become a Taoist. She
was still puzzling over the incomprehensible nature of this disaster when Bao-chai
came over from the Garden.
‘Child, have you heard the news?’ Aunt Xue asked her. ‘Mrs Zhen’s younger sister,
San-jie - the one that was engaged to marry Pan’s new “brother” Liu Xiang-lian - has
cut her throat. I’ve no idea why. And Xiang-lian has renounced the world and just
disappeared. Isn’t it terrible? I don’t know what to make of it.’
Bao-chai heard her without emotion.
‘ It is as the proverb says, Mamma: “The weather and human life are
unpredictable.” This was probably preordained because of something they did in
their past lives. The other day you were planning to do everything you could for him
because of what he did for Pan. Now she is dead and he has disappeared. I think the
best thing you can do is just forget about them. There is no point in upsetting
yourself on their account; there are other things to worry about. It is more than a
fortnight now since Pan got back from the South and the goods he brought with him
must all have been disposed of by now. Surely you ought to have a word with him
about entertaining the people who went with him on the journey? They had a good
deal of hardship to put up with during their months of travel. It will seem very
uncouth of us if we do not find some way of showing our appreciation.’
While Bao-chai and her mother were talking, Xue Pan came in from outside. His eyes
were still wet from recent weeping.
‘Mamma,’ he said, ‘have you heard about Xiang-lian and San-jie ?’
‘They told me only a few minutes ago,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Your sister and I were talking
about it when you came in.’
‘You heard that Xiang-lian had gone off with some Taoist then,’ said Xue Pan.
‘Yes,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘That’s what’s so extraordinary. Why should an intelligent
young man like that suddenly take leave of his senses to go wandering off with a
Taoist? As he had no parents or brothers, I think it’s up to you as his best friend to
find him. They say the Taoist is both mad and lame, so they cannot have got very far -
probably no farther than one of the temples or monasteries in this vicinity.’
‘That’s exactly what I thought, Mamma,’ said Xue Pan. ‘As soon as I heard the news,
I went around looking for him with the boys, but we couldn’t find a trace of him
anywhere, and none of the people we talked to seemed to have seen him.’
‘Well, if you’ve already looked for him and he can’t be found, you’ve done as much
as a friend could do,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Some good might yet come of it, you never
know. What you’ve got to do now is start getting your business back into shape. And
for another thing, it’s time you started thinking about your own marriage and making
a few prepa?rations. We’ve got no other man in the family but you and you’re not as
bright as you might be. You know what they say about baby birds learning to fly. The
sillier the bird, the sooner it must begin. If you start getting ready well in advance,
there will be less danger of making yourself ridiculous when the time comes by
finding that there are all sorts of things you have forgotten. And there’s something
else I want to talk to you about. Your sister has just been pointing out to me, it’s
more than a fortnight since you came back and the goods you brought hack with you
must all have been sold off by now. You ought to give a little party for those of our
employees who went with you on the journey - just a little gesture to show them that
you appreciate their services. After all, it was a long journey. What would it be? A
thousand miles there and back? Pretty nearly. You were four or five months away, at
all events. And don’t forget, they underwent some very alarming experiences on
your behalf.’
‘You’re absolutely right, Mamma,’ said Xue Pan. ‘And sis, she always thinks of
everything. I had thought about it myself, but during these last few days, what with
running around everywhere disposing of the stock until my head feels’ as if it will
burst and running around getting things ready for Xiang?-lian’s wedding (fat lot of
good that was, now that it’s all come to nothing!) I somehow didn’t get round to it.
Still, it’s not too late. We can fix a time for tomorrow or the day after and send the
invitations out straight away.’
‘I leave all that to you,’ said his mother.
The words were scarcely out of her mouth when one of the pages came in from
outside to report.
‘There are some men here from the shop with two cases of stuff for you and a
message from Mr Zhang. He says these are the things you bought for yourself, that
aren’t on the stock-list. He would have sent them round earlier, but there were a lot
of other cases on top of them and he couldn’t get them out. He says they didn’t
finish selling the stock off until yesterday, so this is the first time he has been able to
get at them.’
Two other pages carried the two cases in, one after the other, while he was speaking.
They were large coir trunks, protectively crated between pairs of roped-together
boards.
‘Aiyo!’ said Xue Pan. ‘How stupid of me! I brought these things back specially for
you and sis, Mamma, but I completely forgot to bring them home with me. Fancy the
boys in the shop having to remember them for me!’
‘It’s a good thing you “brought them back specially”, said Bao-chai. ‘Now we’re only
getting them a fortnight late. If you hadn’t “brought them back specially”, we should
probably have had to wait until the end of the year! It’s the same with everything
you do. You are so thoughtless.’
Xue Pan laughed.
‘I think it’s because of that scare we had on the journey. It scared the wits out of
me and they haven’t got back into the right holes yet.’
The others laughed. He turned to the boy who had come in with the message.
‘All right. Tell the men outside we’ve got the stuff now and they can go back to the
shop.’
Aunt Xue and Bao-chai were curious.
‘Well, what is it you’ve got all crated and corded up so carefully?’
Xue Pan told the pages to untie the ropes, remove the protecting boards and undo
the fastenings of the trunks. The first one contained mostly materials - silks, satins,
brocades and so forth - and various foreign articles of domestic use.
‘The other trunk is stuff I got specially for you, sis,’ said Xue Pan.
He undid the fastenings of it himself. Besides writing?brushes, ink-sticks, inkstones,
different sorts of fancy stationery, purses, rosaries, fans, fan-cases, face-powder,
rouge and other feminine articles, it contained a whole lot of novelties from
Hu-qiu-shan: little mercury-filled automata who turned somersaults when you put
them down on the floor or a table, automata with sand-filled cylindrical bodies
whose arms, legs and heads moved when you set the sand running, and lots and lots
of scenes from drama made up of tiny figures moulded in coloured clay in cases of
transparent green gauze. Most fascinating of all was a tiny made-to-order figure of
Xue Pan himself, looking exactly like the original in every detail. Bao- chai had no eyes
for anything but this. Picking the tiny replica up in her hand to examine it, she looked
from it to the original and burst out laughing. She had the other things put back into
the trunk and ordered two of the older servants to carry it to All-spice Court for her
under Oriole’s supervision while she herself stayed chatting a little longer with her
mother and brother. Then she too went back into the Garden.
After she had gone, Aunt Xue proceeded to go over the contents of the other trunk
with Providence, taking them out, putting them into separate piles, and explaining
which pile was to be given to Grandmother Jia, which to Lady Wang, and so forth.
Xue Pan for his part began there and then to make preparations for a party. The
invitations to his employees were dispatched with great urgency, for he was
determined that the party should be on the very next day. As a number of people
were invited, it took some time for all of them to assemble and there was much talk
about trading, accountancy and the disposal of stock before the last of the guests
had arrived. When they were all present, Xue Pan invited them to take their places at
table and went round himself with the wine-kettle to fill their cups. Aunt Xue sent
someone in to thank them on the family’s behalf for their loyal service. Thereupon
drinking began and conversation of a more general kind among the guests. Presently
one of them observed that a good friend was missing from their company whose
presence might have been expected.
‘Oh?’ said the others. ‘Who’s that?’
‘Mr Liu,’ the man said, ‘that saved all our lives and became a blood-brother to the
master.’
This started a good deal of speculation among the guests and finally one of them
asked Xue Pan outright why he had not invited him. Xue Pan frowned and sighed.
‘Don’t ask me about him,’ he said. ‘It’s a very funny business. It isn’t “Mr Liu” now
any longer. It’s “Father Liu”.’
The others expressed surprise.
‘How can that be?’
Xue Pan related the whole story to them. They were even more surprised when they
heard.
‘Now I understand what they were shouting about yesterday outside the shop,’ said
one of them. ‘It was something about a man having been converted by only two or
three words spoken to him by a Taoist. Someone else said the two of them had
vanished into thin air. They didn’t say who the man was. We were all busy selling
stock at the time, so we couldn’t go outside to find out and we’ve been wondering
ever since whether to believe the story or not. We never imagined it was Mr Liu they
were talking about. If we’d known, we’d have gone after him and tried to reason with
him. I’m sure we’d have found some way of stopping him.’
‘I’ve got a different theory about what happened,’ said one of them.
‘Oh? What’s that?’ the others asked him.
‘Well,’ said the man with the theory, ‘it doesn’t seem very likely that a clever young
chap like Mr Liu would suddenly go off to become the disciple of an old Taoist. We
know how strong he is and how good at martial arts. Perhaps he’d found out that this
Taoist was really a wicked magician and just pretended to become his disciple so that
when he’d got him to some quiet, out-of-the-way place he could do him in.’
‘If that’s what it is, that’s very good,’ said Xue Pan. ‘There are too many of these
fellows going around leading people astray with their silly nonsense. It needs a
person like Xiang-?lian to put a few of them down.’
‘But didn’t you look for Mr Liu yourself when you heard about this?’ his guests
asked him.
‘Of course I did,’ said Xue Pan. ‘Inside and outside the city. And I don’t mind telling
you - you can laugh at me if you like - I had a good old cry when I couldn’t find him.’
He sighed several times and looked very despondent. His customary cheerfulness
seemed to have deserted him altogether since this loss. Seeing him so downcast, his
employees did not venture to stay long, but drank the wine up, finished up the food,
and dispersed. We, too, shall leave him at this point and continue our interrupted
narrative of the previous day.
*
When Bao-chai got back from her mother’s to her own room in All-spice Court, she
went over the toys that Xue Pan had given her, deciding which of her cousins each
one of them should go to and retaining only a very few of them for herself. When she
had finished doing that, she proceeded to portion out the other things as well. For
some of the cousins there were writing-brushes, paper, inkstones and ink; for others,
purses, fans and rosaries; some were to have hair-oil, powder and rouge; for some
there were to be only toys. She made the little piles as equal as possible, except in
the case of Dai-yu, for whom she selected twice as much as for anyone else. Having
explained very carefully to Oriole who each of the piles was for, she sent her off, with
an old woman acting as portress, to go round to all the apartments and deliver them.
With one exception, the cousins, on receiving their presents, tipped the bearers and
said that they would thank Bao-chai in person when they next saw her. Dai-yu alone
reacted some?what differently. The sight of the Hu-qiu toys, manufactured only a few
miles from her native Soochow, brought on a severe attack of nostalgia. Once more
she was reminded of her position: an orphan and an outsider, with no kind brother in
her case to bring back things for her from the South. Already she was beginning to be
upset. Nightingale knew at once what was the matter, but judged it more politic to
remonstrate than to let her mistress know that she understood.
‘Look at all the illness you’ve had, miss. You hardly ever stop taking medicine. It’s
only just recently that you’ve begun to look a bit better. Though even now I think it’s
more a case of being in better spirits than being properly cured. You can see from the
fact that Miss Bao has sent you all these things that she must think a lot of you. That
ought to make you happy, not upset you. Whatever is Miss Bao going to think if she
gets to hear that the things she has sent you have made you feel miserable? That’s
not going to he very nice for her, is it? And there’s another thing. Look how
concerned Her Old Ladyship and Her Ladyship always are about your health, how
they get the best doctors and the best medicines to try and cure you. And now, just
as you are beginning to be a little bit better, here you go, crying and making yourself
miserable. It’s as if you wanted to get ill again, just to give them something more to
worry about! It was too much fretting that brought on your illness in the first place.
You ought to have a bit more consideration for yourself.’
While Nightingale was admonishing her mistress, a voice from the courtyard was
heard announcing ‘Master Bao’. Nightingale called to him to come inside.
‘Sit down,’ said Dai-yu..
    Bao-yu noticed that she had been crying.
‘Hullo, what’s the matter?’ he asked. ‘Who’s been upsetting you?’
Dai-yu forced a smile.
     ‘I’m not upset.’
Nightingale shot her lips out and gestured towards the table behind Dai-yu’s bed. His
eyes followed her gesture to the pile of presents on the table. He realized she could
only just have received them from Bao-chai.
‘Why, what a lot of things you’ve got there!’ he said. ‘Are you planning to set up a
shop?’
Dai-yu made no reply.
‘Don’t talk about them!’ said Nightingale. ‘They’re from Miss Bao. As soon as Miss
Lin set eyes on them, she burst into tears. I was just trying to talk some sense into her
when you came in. Perhaps, now you’re here, you’ll be able to do it for me.’
Bao-yu knew what Dai-yu’s trouble was as well as Nightin?gale, but was no more
willing than Nightingale to show her that he knew. He merely laughed, therefore, and
answered Nightingale with a jest.
‘Oh, I know what’s upset your mistress. She’s cross because Miss Bao didn’t send
her more. Never mind, coz,’ he said, turning to Dai-yu, ‘one of these days I’ll he
visiting Kiangnan myself, and when I do, I promise to bring you back two whole
boatloads of these things. That should dry your eyes for you!’
Dai-yu, aware that she was being ‘cheered up’, could not rebuff the clumsy attempt
too impatiently; nor, on the other hand, did she feel inclined to let it pass
unreproved.
‘I may be very stupid and ill-bred, but not quite to the extent of getting into a
passion because I have not been given enough toys. I am not a three-year-old. You
make me out to be even more petty-minded than I am. I have my own reasons for
what I feel. What do you know about them?’
As she said this, the tears began once more to flow. Bao-yu moved over from his seat
and sat down beside her on the bed. He began picking the articles on the table up
one by one, turning them this way and that to examine them, and asking her all sorts
of questions about them. What was this? What did you call it? Wasn’t this one clever?
What was it made of? And this one, what was it for? He also made various
suggestions as to where she should put them. This one he thought would be nice to
keep by her on her desk; that one would look well with the vases and other
ornaments on the wall-table; and so on and so on until Dai-yu felt that, however
well-intentioned this might be, she could stand no more.
‘Come on, you’re being a nuisance,’ she said. ‘Let’s go and see Bao-chai.’
This was precisely what Bao-yu had been hoping for. If he could get her to go out, the
distraction of doing something else might cause her to forget her sadness.
‘Good!’ he said. ‘We ought to go, anyway, to thank her for the things.’
‘I wasn’t thinking of that,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Between cousins there is no need for such
formality. I was thinking that, having just got back from the South, Cousin Pan must
have told her a lot about the places there he visited, and hearing about them from
Chai would be the next best thing to taking a trip back there myself.’
Her eyes began to redden, and for a moment it seemed in doubt if she would go out
after all; but as Bao-yu was already on his feet waiting for her, she was more or less
obliged to follow him.
‘After all the trouble Cousin Pan went to in getting them to you,’ Bao-yu told
Bao-chai when they were in her room, ‘you ought to have kept those things for
yourself, not given them all away to other people.’
‘There’s nothing very special about them,’ said Bao-chai. ‘They are all inexpensive
objects made by local craftsmen which just happen to have come from a long way
away. I thought the rest of you might find them amusing.’
‘When I was little, these things were so familiar to me that I thought nothing of
them,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Now, after all these years, they have become novelties again.’
“‘The farther from home, the more precious the object” as the saying goes,’ said
Bao-chai. ‘Not that these are precious, of course.’
Bao-yu feared that Bao-chai was moving onto dangerous ground and intervened to
change the subject.
‘Be sure to make Pan go again next year, Chai, and bring us back a lot more.’
Dai-yu stared.
‘If you want to make such a request, that’s your business, but kindly leave others
out of it!’ She turned to Bao-chai. ‘He has not come here to thank you, you observe,
but to put in an order for next year.’
Bao-chai and Bao-yu both laughed.
As the three of them chattered on, the conversation presently turned to the subject
of Dai-yu’s illness.
‘When you are out of sorts,’ Bao-chai suggested, ‘you want to force yourself to go
out of doors: walk around, visit people, look at things - anything to take your mind off
yourself. You’ll find it is much better for you than sitting cooped up indoors feeling
miserable. I wasn’t feeling very well recently. I felt exhausted all day long and hot all
over and wanted to do nothing but lie down. This is a bad time of the year for me,
and I was afraid of becoming seriously ill. So I started deliberately looking for things
to do and forcing myself to do them; and do you know, during the last day or two I
really have begun to feel better.’
‘I am sure you are right,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I have in fact come to the same conclusion
myself.’
*
The person most gratified by Bao-chai’s presents was Aunt Zhao.
‘I’m not surprised they all say what a nice girl that Bao-chai is,” she said to herself
when the consignment of toys arrived for Jia Huan. ‘You can see from this how kind
and generous she is. Her brother can’t have brought all that much back for her from
his travels, yet every single person has been remembered. No one’s been left out
because they aren’t impor?tant, even the unlucky ones like us that no one else ever
bothers about. Now if it had been that Lin girl, it would have been a very different
story. She can scarcely even bring herself to look you straight in the face. You
wouldn’t catch her sending us things like this!’
As these thoughts passed through her mind, she was turning the things over and
over in her hands and arranging them this way and that upon the kang. Presently the
thought occurred to her that Bao-chai was close kin to Lady Wang. Why should she
not take advantage of that fact to ingratiate herself with Lady Wang? Gathering the
articles up in her arms, she went off, full of fuss and self-importance, to Lady Wang’s
room and took up a position at her elbow.
‘Look!’ she said, putting on a very affected smile. ‘Look what Bao-chai has just sent
our Huan! Such thoughtfulness in one so young! She’s a real little lady, Bao-chai. She
has class. And so generous. You can’t help admiring her. I don’t wonder you and Her
Old Ladyship are so fond of her and always speaking so highly of her. I didn’t like to
keep these things without your permission, that’s why I’ve brought them. And I
thought it might amuse you to look at them.’
Lady Wang had guessed what the motive for her visit must be long before she had
finished. The clumsy attempt to ingratiate was by no means pleasing to her, but she
could not ignore it altogether.
‘Certainly you should keep them,’ she said. ‘Let Huan have them to play with.’
She had merely glanced at the toys in saying this and then turned away again.
So Aunt Zhao, who had been so cock-a-hoop when she came, had got nothing for her
pains but a smutty nose. Angry, but not daring to show it, she returned crestfallen to
her room and threw the things into a corner, muttering crossly to herself as she did
so.
‘Hfn! What do you make of that then?’
And she sat on her own there on the kang, continuing to mutter to herself as she
brooded angrily on her wrongs.
*
Oriole and the old woman had by this time finished delivering presents and went
hack to give their mistress an account of the messages of thanks sent back by the
recipients and the various tips they had received. As soon as the old woman had
gone out, Oriole moved closer to where Bao-chai was sitting and spoke softly into her
ear.
‘When we were delivering at Mrs Lian’s just now, Mrs Lian looked absolutely
furious about something. I had a word with Crimson on my way out and she said that
when Mrs Lian came back from Her Old Ladyship’s a little before we arrived she was
looking very grim - not at all her usual smiling self. She called for Patience as soon as
she got back and they were talking earnestly together about something, but she
couldn’t hear what they were saying. It looks as though something really serious
must have happened. Did you hear about anything while you were at Her Old
Ladyship’s today, miss?’
Bao-chai wondered what could have made Xi-feng so angry, but could think of
nothing.
‘Every household has its own troubles,’ she told Oriole. ‘It isn’t our business to
inquire. Go and pour me some tea.’
So Oriole went out to pour tea and nothing more on that subject was said.
*
After seeing Dai-yu to her gate, Bao-yu continued on his way to Green Delights. While
he did so, he was thinking how hard it must be to be an orphan and feeling more and
more sorry for her. He resolved to have a word with Aroma about it when he got
back, but when he got back, only Musk and Ripple were in his room.
‘Where’s Aroma?’ he asked them.
‘Must he in one or other of the courtyards hereabouts,’ said Musk. ‘She can’t be
lost. Why the sudden urge to see her?’
Bao-yu smiled.
‘I didn’t imagine she was lost. The reason I asked is because I’ve just got back from
seeing Miss Lin. She seemed to be rather upset about something, and when I asked
her what it was, she said the things that Miss Bao sent her were made quite near her
old home and the sight of them had upset her. I was going to ask Aroma if she’d mind
going over and having a word with her.’
‘Oh dear! Who’s in for it this time?’
It was Skybright who said this. She had come in at that moment and overheard only
the last few words he had spoken. He repeated for her benefit the whole of what he
had just been saying to Musk.
‘Aroma went out a few minutes ago,’ said Skybright. ‘I think she was going to call on
Mrs Lian. It’s quite possible that she may drop in at Miss Lin’s place on her way back.’
Bao-yu made no reply. Ripple poured him a cup of tea. He took it from her
absent-mindedly, rinsed his mouth with some of it, handed the rest to one of the
junior maids, and stretched himself out on his bed, looking thoroughly miserable.
*
After Bao-yu went off to visit Dai-yu, Aroma had at first occupied herself with some
sewing. While she was doing this, it suddenly occurred to her that it was some time
since she had been to call on Xi-feng and ask about her illness. Now seemed as good
a time as any to visit her, because she knew that Jia Lian was not there so that she
would be able to converse with her more freely. When she had changed her clothes
and, with the aid of a hand-mirror, made a few adjustments to her appearance, she
went in again to tell Skybright of her decision.
‘I’m off to Mrs Lian’s now. Stay in the room while I’m gone, will you? We don’t want
Master Bao calling out and finding nobody there.’
‘Aiyo!’ said Skybright sarcastically. ‘You are the only one who ever thinks about him,
of course. The rest of us just sit around all day doing nothing.’
Aroma merely laughed and went off without replying. As she came within sight of the
water near Drenched Blossoms Bridge, she saw that the lotuses were all dead and
ragged-looking; but the hibiscus-bushes along the banks were just coming into flower,
the pink budding clusters making a brilliant contrast with the bright green of the
leaves. She lingered on her way along the embankment so that she could get a better
view of them. Looking up suddenly from her contemplation of the hibiscus bushes,
she became aware that on the other side of the path a little ahead of her someone
was standing under the grape-vine waving a feather-duster about, apparently dusting
something. When she got a little nearer, she could see that it was that indefatigable
gardener, Mamma Zhu. Recognizing Aroma, the old woman beamed and came up to
greet her.
‘It’s not often you find time to go out walking, miss?’
‘No, indeed,’ said Aroma. ‘I’m on my way to see Mrs Lian. What are you doing?’
‘I’m trying to keep these wasps off the grapes,’ said the old woman. ‘There was
very little rain in the dog-days this year, consequently it’s brought the pests out onto
all the fruit. It gets riddled all over with bites and a lot of it is dropping before it’s ripe.
These wasps are terrible things. You’d never credit it. They’ll go for just two or three
grapes in a bunch, but the juice drips from them onto the rest, and then the whole
bunch is spoiled. Look at that, miss! A whole lot more of them have settled just in the
time we have been talk?ing.’
‘Even if you keep at it non-stop with that duster of yours, you’re not going to keep
off more than a few of them,’ said Aroma. ‘Why don’t you ask one of the buyers to
get a lot of muslin bags made for you, to tie over the bunches? They will keep off the
birds and wasps while still allowing the air to get at them.’
‘I certainly will,’ said the old woman. ‘What a clever idea! I’ve never heard of that
one before - but then this is the first year I’ve had the job, you see.’ She smiled. ‘Look,
miss, although so many of the grapes are spoiled, they still taste good. Let me pick
you some to try.’
Aroma looked serious.
‘No, no. I don’t think they’re ripe enough to eat yet, in any case; but even if they
were, I couldn’t possibly eat any before the first-fruits have been offered to the
ancestors. Surely a person who has worked as many years for the family as you have
must know that rule?’
‘Of course, miss. You are quite right,’ said the old woman hurriedly. ‘It was being so
pleased that put it for the moment from my mind. I am a foolish old woman.’
‘It doesn’t really matter,’ said Aroma. ‘But you older servants ought not to set us
younger ones a bad example.’
She continued on her way then, out of the Garden and round to Xi-feng’s place. As
she entered the courtyard, she could hear the sound of Xi-feng’s raised voice coming
from inside the house.
‘It’s monstrous! Treating me like a criminal, after all I’ve had to put up with in this
place!’
Whatever the background of this remark might be, it was obvious to Aroma that this
would be an extremely inopportune moment to go in; and yet it was already too late
for her to turn back. The best she could do was to advertise her presence. She
deliberately made a heavier noise with her feet and called out to Patience through
the window. Patience came hurrying out to welcome her.
‘Is Mrs Lian in?’ Aroma asked her. ‘Is she quite better yet?’
By now she was inside the house; but Xi-feng had already had time to get up on the
couch and pretend that she had been lying down. She rose to her feet as Aroma
entered.
‘Yes, I am a little better, thank you. It is kind of you to remember me. It seems quite
a time since you last came round here.’
‘Knowing you weren’t well, I ought by rights to have been coming every day,’ said
Aroma. ‘On the other hand, when you arc poorly, you need lots of peace and quiet
for resting, and I was afraid that if I came too often it might disturb you.’
‘Oh, I don’t mind the disturbance,’ said Xi-feng smiling.
‘But I realize that it isn’t easy for you to get away from Master Bao. Although he has
so many girls to wait on him, you are the one he really relies on. Patience tells me
you are always asking her how I am; so you see, even though you can’t get over here,
I know that you are concerned about me.’
She asked Patience to bring a stool over and put it down beside the couch she was
reclining on for Aroma to sit on. Felicity came in with some tea. Aroma inclined
herself politely as she accepted it and murmured something about Felicity troubling
herself.

While she was talking to Xi-feng, she noticed a junior maid go up to Patience in the
outer room and quietly announce that Brightie had arrived and was waiting at the
inner gate. She heard Patience answer the girl in the same guarded undertone:
‘Good. Tell him to go away for a few minutes and come back later. Tell him not to
hang about outside this courtyard.’
Aroma knew from this that Xi-feng must have business of some kind, so after sitting
for a minute or two longer, she got up to go. Xi-feng made no attempt to stop her.
‘Come again when you can,’ she said. ‘It does me good to talk to you.’
She summoned Patience to see Aroma out. As Aroma followed Patience through the
outer room, she saw two or three junior maids waiting there, obviously scared out of
their wits and looking as if they scarcely dared to breathe. Aroma passed through the
courtyard gate and continued on her way back alone, wondering what could be the
matter.
As soon as she had finished seeing off Aroma, Patience went in again to report to
Xi-feng.
‘Brightie came, but because Aroma was here, I said he was to go and wait in the
front. Shall I have him called in now straight away, or shall I let him wait a bit? What
do you want me to do?’
‘Call him in,’ said Xi-feng.
‘Tell me,’ said Xi-feng in the interval while they were waiting for him to arrive, ‘what
exactly was it you heard?’
‘It was that girl I sent out just now who actually heard it,” said Patience. ‘She said
that while she was waiting at the inner gate, she heard two of the pages talking to
each other on the other side of it. One of them said, “The new mistress is even
prettier than the old one and ever so much better-tempered.” Then she heard
someone else - she thought it might have been Brightie - telling the other two off.
“What’s this ‘new mistress’ ‘old mistress’ you’re talking about? You’d better keep
your voices down. If anyone inside gets to hear about this, you’ll have your tongues
cut out!”’
At this point one of the junior maids came in.
‘Brightie’s waiting outside, ma’am.’
A chilling little laugh from Xi-feng.
‘Tell him to come in.’
The little maid went outside again.
‘The mistress says you are to come in.’
‘Hei!’
Brightie stepped smartly inside, dropped his knee to the ground, and ended up
standing stiffly to attention in the doorway leading to the inner room.
‘Come here,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I want to talk to you.’
Brightie came into the room and stood in front of his mistress, a little to one side.
‘Your master’s got himself a woman outside,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Did you know?’
Brightie dropped his knee to the ground once more.
‘I spend all my time on call at the inner gate, madam. I’ve no means of knowing
what the master does outside.’
Xi-feng’s smile was full of malice.
‘Of course you wouldn’t know. You wouldn’t stop other people talking about if you
did, would you?’
Brightie realized from this that the words he had recently been saying to the other
pages must have been overheard and that it would be impossible now to deceive her.
He fell on his knees to reply.
‘I really don’t know, madam. I just happened to hear Joker and Happy talking a lot
of nonsense, so I shouted to them to be quiet; but I really couldn’t tell you the exact
circumstances they were talking about; I should only be making it up if I tried. You
want to ask Joker, madam. When the master’s here, he spends most of his time with
him outside.’
Xi-feng spat with great force.
‘Black-hearted, worthless scum the lot of you! You are all in league against me, do
you think I don’t know? Go out and find that little pimp Joker and bring him here.
And don’t go away when you’ve done that, either. Wait here. I’ll have a few questions
to ask you when I’ve finished with him. – Wonderful!’ she commented to herself.
‘This is my trusted servant whom I employ on all my most confidential business!’
‘Yes, madam. Very good, madam.’
Brightie knocked his head upon the floor, then scrambled to his feet and went off to
look for Joker.
Joker was in the counting-house fooling about with some of the other pages when
word came to him that he was ‘wanted by Mrs Lian’. Startled, but never for a
moment imagining that his master’s secret had been blown, he hurried off after
Brightie to Xi-feng’s apartment to find out why he was wanted. When they got there,
Brightie went in first.
     ‘Joker is here, madam.’
     ‘Bring him in!’
Even before he had seen her, the mere sound of that strident summons was enough
to throw Joker’s thoughts into confusion. But there was nothing for it: he had to
screw up his courage and follow Brightie into the inner room.
‘Well, my little man,’ said Xi-feng as he entered, ‘this is a fine thing you and your
master have been up to! I think you had better tell me all about it.
Joker heard the words, he saw the anger in Xi-feng’s face and the terrified looks of
the maids who stood motionless to left and right of her, and his legs became so weak
that he sank involuntarily to his knees and began kotowing.
‘I’ve been told that this business has really nothing to do with you,’ she said. ‘Your
only fault is in not having come to me and reported it. I am willing to overlook that if
you tell me the truth. But woe betide you if you tell me a single word that is false! If
you had a dozen heads, I should have each one of them!’
Joker rose up, trembling, to his knees:
‘What is it the master and I have done wrong that you want to know about,
madam?’
It was as though the fire that smouldered in Xi-feng had suddenly burst into flame.
‘Strike the mouth that said that!’ she shouted, beside herself.
Brightie advanced, with hand upraised, to do her bidding.
‘Not you, idiot!’ Xi-feng shouted. ‘I am asking him to strike himself. Don’t worry, I
shall have you striking your own mouth too before we are finished!’
      Joker, still kneeling, began opening his arms to left and right of him and bringing
them forcibly together, so as to slap his hands simultaneously upon his face. Xi-feng
allowed him to do this a dozen or more times before shouting to him to stop.
‘Now,’ she said, ‘what’s all this about the “new mistress” your master has married?
I suppose you are going to tell me you know nothing about it?’
Joker, gathering from this that the whole story was out, became quite desperate.
Plucking his hat off he began bumping his head on the floor in a frenzy of
self-abasement.
‘Only spare my life, madam! I swear that every word I tell you shall be the truth.’
‘Get on with it, then!’
Joker knelt stiffly upright in order to do so.
‘I didn’t know about this business at the beginning, madam. I think it started during
the time when Sir Jing’s body was still lying at the temple. Yu Lu went out there one
day to ask Mr Zhen for some money and when Master Rong came back into the city
to see about it, the master came with him. On their way they got talking about Mrs
Zhen’s two sisters, and the master said how much he admired the new mistress - er,
the other Mrs Lian, and Master Rong, he said, joking-like -,
Xi-feng spat.
‘Turtle’s egg! What “other Mrs Lian”?’
‘Beg pardon, ma’am!’ said Joker hurriedly, and kotowed again.
When he had risen once more on his knees, he fixed his eyes miserably on the ceiling,
unable to go on.
‘Well?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Is that all? Why don’t you go on?’
‘You’ll have to bear with me, madam,’ said the wretched Joker, ‘otherwise I daren’t.’
‘Bear with you?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Bear with your mother’s arsehole! I advise you to get
on with your story: it will be very much better for you if you do!’
‘Master Rong said he could arrange for the master to marry her. The master was
very pleased. Then - well, I don’t know how exactly, but he did.’
The very faintest of smiles hovered briefly over Xi-feng’s face.
‘I don’t suppose you do know. No doubt if you did, it would make a very
complicated story. All right, go on. What happened after that?’
‘After that Master Rong found the master a house.’
‘Oh?’ said Xi-feng sharply. ‘Where is it?’
‘A few streets behind our place,’ said Joker. ‘Not very far.’
‘So!’ Xi-feng turned and looked hard at Patience. ‘You heard that? You and I are
both dead, Patience. We don’t exist any more!’
Patience dared not reply.
Joker continued his story.
‘Mr Zhen gave a lot of money to the Zhangs so that they wouldn’t object to the
wedding.’
‘Now we have a Zhang family in the story,’ said Xi-feng. ‘This is getting rather
complicated.’
‘Ah yes, you see, madam, the other Mrs Lian -’
Joker suddenly realized what he had said and dealt himself a slap across the mouth.
Xi-feng laughed in spite of herself and the maids to right and left of her puckered up
their faces and giggled. Joker thought for a bit.
‘The elder of Mrs Zhen’s two sisters – ’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Get on with it! What about her?’
‘The elder of Mrs Zhen’s two sisters was engaged when she was little to someone
called Zhang. I think his name is Zhang Hua. Nowadays he and his family are very
poor beggars, almost. Mr Zhen promised them some money in return for breaking off
the engagement.’
Xi-feng nodded, then turned to look at the maids: ‘You hear this, all of you? This is
the little monster who was telling us a few minutes ago that he didn’t know
anything!’
Joker continued:
‘After that Mr Lian had the new house redecorated and she came there for the
wedding.’
‘Where from?’ said Xi-feng.
‘From her mother’s place,’ said Joker.
‘Hm, I see. Was she escorted by anyone?’
‘Only Master Rong and a few maids and nannies. No one else.’
‘What about Mrs Zhen?’
‘She came along a couple of days later with some presents.’
Xi-feng laughed and turned to address Patience behind her.
‘There you are! Don’t you remember there were a couple of days when he hardly
stopped praising Mrs Zhen and telling us what a wonderful person she was?’
The smile on her face quickly vanished as she turned back again.
‘And who waits on them there? - You, of course.’
Joker hurriedly kotowed but did not attempt to reply.
‘Come to think of it,’ said Xi-feng, ‘I suppose all those times he told me he had to be
away because he had business to do for our Ning-guo cousins, it was really this that
he was up to.’
‘Sometimes he really was doing things for them, sometimes he was at the new
house,’ said Joker.
‘Who’s living with her there?’ said Xi-feng.
‘Her mother and her younger sister - leastways, the younger sister was living with
her, but the day before yesterday she cut her throat.’
‘Why did she do that?’ said Xi-feng.
Joker told her the whole story of San-jie and Liu Xiang-lian.
‘He was a lucky man,’ said Xi-feng when he had finished telling it. ‘I’ve no doubt
that if he’d married her she would have made him a most notorious cuckold. - Have
you anything else to tell me?’
‘I’ve told you all I know, madam, and every word I’ve told you is true. You can ask
other people. If you find a word of a lie in what I’ve told you, you can beat me to
death and I shan’t complain.’
Xi-feng bowed her head for some moments, reflecting. Eventually she looked up
again and pointed her finger at him.
‘You are a wicked little wretch and I ought by rights to kill you for imagining that
you could deceive me. I suppose you thought that by deceiving me you would do
that stupid master of yours a favour and your new mistress would love you for it. If it
weren’t that I thought you were too frightened just now to have lied to me, I should
have broken both your legs.’ Her voice rose to a shout. ‘Get up!’
Joker kotowed several times, scrambled to his feet, and retreated as far as the
threshold of the outer room, not daring to leave altogether.
‘Come back!’ said Xi-feng. ‘I haven’t finished with you yet.’
Joker turned and advanced some steps and stood with his arms held stiffly at his
sides and his body inclined forwards in a respectful attitude of attention.
‘What’s the hurry?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Is your new mistress waiting to give you
something?’
Joker dared not look up.
‘From now on you are not to go there any more,’ said Xi-feng. ‘From now on, if I call
for you at any time of any day, I shall expect you to be there straight away - and I
warn you, you’d better see to it that I’m not kept waiting! All right. Be off!’
Again he withdrew. This time he got as far as the steps outside the door.
‘Joker!’
‘Madam?’ He turned back once more.
‘Off to tell the master all about it, aren’t you?’
‘Oh no, madam! I wouldn’t dare.’
‘All right, go then; but if you breathe a word of this outside, I’ll have you flayed!’
‘Yes, madam. Very good, madam.’
Joker now made his final exit.
‘Brightie!’ Xi-feng called.
‘Yes’m!’ Brightie came bounding forward.
Xi-feng opened her eyes very wide and stared at him for the length of time it would
take to say two or three sentences; then finally she spoke.
‘So, Brightie. Very good. Excellent. Now go. And if anyone outside breathes a word
about this, I shall hold you responsible.’
‘Yes’m.’
Brightie withdrew very slowly from her presence; but in his case there was no recall.
‘Pour the tea,’ said Xi-feng.
This was taken by the junior maids as a signal for them to withdraw, which they did
immediately, leaving Xi-feng alone with Patience.
‘You heard all that?’ said Xi-feng. ‘That’s good.’
Patience smiled, but dared not say anything.
Xi-feng appeared to be thinking, and to be growing angrier and angrier the more she
thought. She lay back with her head on the pillow and gave herself up wholly to her
thoughts. Presently she frowned as if an idea had just occurred to her.
‘Patience, come here.’
‘Madam?’
‘I’ve thought what to do,’ said Xi-feng. And she proceeded to tell Patience what she
had planned.
But in order to know what that was, you must wait for the following chapter.
CHAPTER 68

Er-jie takes up residence
in Prospect Garden
And Xi-feng makes a disturbance
in Ning-guo House



When Jia Lian made his second expedition to Ping-an in the tenth month, he found
that the Military Governor was away on a tour of inspection; and since no one
seemed willing to predict when he would be back, there was obviously nothing he
could do but sit in his lodgings and wait for that elusive official to turn up. It was in
fact several weeks before he did, so that by the time Jia Lian had finished transacting
his business and made the journey back home again, almost two months had elapsed
since he set out.
      But we anticipate. Let us return to the point at which we left off in the last
chapter.
      After hearing Joker’s revelations, Xi-feng deliberately concealed her knowledge
from Jia Lian for several weeks. It was not until he had started out on his journey to
Ping-an that she began putting her plan into execution.
      The first thing she did was to call in the workmen - carpenters, decorators,
paperers and so forth - and have the three-frame building on the east side of her and
Jia Lian’s courtyard converted into a smaller replica of the main apartment. On the
fourteenth of the tenth month, when the decorating and furnishing of this apartment
had been completed, she went to see Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang and
announced her intention of going out first thing next morning to burn incense in a
certain convent-temple in the vicinity. She would take only four companions with her,
she said: Patience, Felicity, Zhou Rui’s wife and Brightie’s wife. She waited until they
were about to get into their carriages on the morning of the fifteenth before
revealing to her companions what their actual destination was to be. They were
going to Er-jie’s house. Xi-feng had previously given instructions to the manservants
who were to accompany them that they were to be dressed in mourning and that the
carriage she rode in was to have mourning trappings. This was because Er-jie, she
had discovered, had not long since suffered a second and greater bereavement: old
Mrs You, who had never quite recovered from the shock caused by her third
daughter’s suicide, had, only two or three weeks previous to this date, taken a nap
which turned out to be her last. Joker was told to lead the way, and it was he who,
arriving at the house a little before the rest of the party, knocked on the gate to give
the occupants warning of its coming. The Mattress came to the door. Joker had by
this time resolved the problem of nomenclature to his own satisfaction:
      ‘Tell Mrs Er,’ he said blandly, ‘that Mrs Lian is here.’
      The immortal parts of the late Droopy’s relict leaped through her cranium and
described several somersaults in the air. She rushed inside to inform her mistress.
Er-jie was no less startled than her servant when she heard the message, but even in
such an extremity she could do no less than receive her visitor with the expected
courtesies. Adjusting her dress, therefore, she went into the front courtyard to meet
her. By this time Xi-feng’s carriage had arrived outside the gate and its occupants
were in process of descending from it. Er-jie watched her visitor curiously as she
entered the outer gate, supported by Zhou Rui’s wife and Brightie’s wife, one on
either side. She was dressed in half-mourning, with hair-ornaments of silver and
white and a spencer of some black material with a silver thread in it over the palest
of pale blue gowns. Underneath the gown she was wearing a plain white satin skirt.
Er-jie was particularly struck by her eyes:
       Brows a branched twig with two high-pendant leaves,
And trigon phoenix-eyes, slant, hard and bright.
And she was very beautiful:
     Pretty as a peach-tree in the spring,
Even in austere autumn’s dress.
      Er-jie advanced to meet her as she entered the courtyard and dropped her a low
curtsey, adopting, in the first words she uttered, the form of address that an inferior
wife uses in speaking to her chief.
‘Forgive me, sister, I had no idea that you were planning to favour me with an
inspection or I should have gone out?side to meet you.’
This was followed by another low curtsey, which Xi-feng, smiling graciously, returned.
After curtseying had continued for some moments on either side, Xi-feng took Er-jie
impulsively by the hand and the two young women walked hand in hand into the
house. Inside, Er-jie made Xi-feng sit down in the place of honour and ordered one of
the maids to bring a cushion and put it down in front of her on the floor.
‘I am still very young,’ she explained to Xi-feng. ‘Since I first came here, everything
has been decided for me by others, either my mother, when she was still with us, or
my elder sister. Now that you have come, I hope - if you do not think me too
unworthy - that you will allow me to take all my instructions from you. I promise to
serve you with all the devotion of which I am capable.’
Having concluded her little speech, she knelt down on the cushion and kotowed.
Xi-feng rose from the chair and bowed.
‘I am as young and inexperienced as you are, sister,’ she said. ‘What I have done for
Mr Lian has always been for his own good, as far as a silly, inexperienced woman like
me could tell what that was. I begged him, as I am sure you would have done in my
position, not to go sleeping out “under the willows” (you know what I mean) both for
his health’s sake and because I knew it would worry his parents; but Mr Lian
completely misunderstood the spirit in which that advice was offered. It wouldn’t
have mattered so much if he’d deceived me about taking a mistress; but marrying a
second wife is a very serious business. He really ought to have told me. It isn’t as if I
hadn’t begged him to take a second wife. If he were to have a son, no matter by
whom, I should stand to benefit as much as he would. It would be a support for me
in my old age. But no. Mr Lian has got it firmly fixed in his mind that I am the sort of
jealous woman who cannot tolerate a rival. And so he has to go off and do this
without telling me. It’s so unfair. Who am I to explain myself to? Only Heaven above
knows what a great injustice he has done me. When I first got wind of your marriage
about ten days ago, I realized at once that it was this mistaken notion he has about
my being so jealous that had prevented him from telling me. I have waited until he is
away before visiting you because I wanted this opportunity of getting to know you
properly. But that is not the only purpose of my visit. I want to ask you - to entreat
you - to show your understanding of my position by leaving this place and coming
back with me to the mansion. Let us live together, side by side, like sisters. Let us join
forces in looking after him: seeing that he performs his duties properly and takes
good care of his health. Surely that is how it ought to be? Just imagine what it will be
like for me if you continue living here outside. Quite apart from my feelings, think of
the effect it will have on my reputation - and on yours, too, for that matter. And even
if you think our reputations are unimportant, as no doubt they are, consider what
the effect will be on Mr Lian’s reputation, which is a far more serious matter. I expect
the servants say all sorts of nasty things about me behind my back. It is their way of
having their revenge on me for being strict. I suppose it is only natural. You know the
proverb. The woman who runs a household is like a water butt: all the dirt washes off
on her. In our household I have three lots of seniors above me and cousins and
sisters-?in-law both single and married in my own generation. If I were really hard to
get on with, how do you think all those people would have managed to put up with
me for so long? Would I have come to you today if I were such a terrible person?
Many wives hearing that their husband had married another woman and was living
outside with her in secret would be unwilling even to set eyes on her. Heaven knows
I’ve tried to accommodate Mr Lian. I’ve even offered him my Patience as a
chamber-wife. I think Heaven and Earth and the Lord Buddha must have taken pity
on me in letting me know about this marriage. They didn’t want me to be destroyed
by a pack of scandal-mongering servants. That’s why I am asking you to come and
live with me. I promise that your treatment will be exactly the same as mine in every
respect: accommodation, service, clothing-allowance, everything. There is so much
that an intelligent person like you could do to help me if you had a mind to. Working
side by side together, we shall not only give the lie to this malicious tittle-tattle of the
servants which I find so wounding; we shall also be able to show Mr Lian when he
gets back how wrong he has been in making me out to be jealous. The three of us
will live in perfect harmony together. And all this I shall owe to you! But if you won’t
come with me, I am perfectly prepared to move in here with you. Provided that you
put in an occasional good word for me with Mr Lian so that I am still left some
ground to stand on, I should even be willing to hold your basin and comb your hair
for you and wait on you like a servant.’
      She concluded this discourse by breaking into noisy weeping. Indeed, so pitiful a
spectacle did she present that Er-jie herself could not help weeping with her. After
further bowings and curtseyings the two women sat down together as first and
second wife and Patience came forward to make Er-jie her kotow. From the superior
quality of her dress and general air of refinement Er-jie could guess who she was and
hurriedly rose to prevent her.
      ‘No, no, you mustn’t do that! You and I are equals.’
Xi-feng stood up, too.
      ‘Nonsense! Let her kotow to you,’ she said, laughing. ‘She is only a maid. She is
your maid as much as mine now and in future you must treat her as such.’
      She ordered Zhou Rui’s wife to take the First Meeting presents out of the bag
she was carrying: four lengths of best quality dress material and four pairs of pearl
and gold earrings with hair ornaments to match. There was more bowing and
curtseying as Er-jie received them. The two wives sat down once more. Tea was
served, and they began to talk things over as they sipped their tea. Xi-feng insisted
that what had happened had chiefly come about through her own fault.
      ‘I blame no one else,’ she said. ‘All I am asking for is a little sympathy.’
     Er-jie was so lacking in guile herself that she had no difficulty in believing that
Xi-feng was a good woman who had been slandered.
‘After all,’ she told herself when she recollected the alarming things that Joker had
said about Xi-feng’s character, ‘servants do often revenge themselves by saying nasty
things about their employers.’
And so, abandoning all caution, she began pouring her heart out unreservedly,
confident that in Xi-feng she had found a friend. Confirmation of this favourable view
in the form of tributes to the excellence of Xi-feng’s household governance were not
wanting from Mesdames Zhou and Brightie in the background.
‘She puts herself out too much for other people, that’s her trouble. She gets no
thanks for it, though. People only complain about her the more.’
They told Er-jie about the apartment that Xi-feng had made ready for her.
‘Beautiful, Mrs Er! You wait till you’ve seen it!’
Er-jie longed to live with Jia Lian inside the mansion like a respectable married
woman and was therefore only too willing to comply with Xi-feng’s request.
‘I ought to go back with you, sister: it is no less than my duty. But what about this
place?’
‘Oh, that’s no problem!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Just get the boys to move out your boxes and
bags for you. You won’t be needing the furniture, you can leave that here. All you
need to do is name whoever of your people is most reliable and we will get whoever
it is to stay here and look after it for you.’
‘Now that I’ve met you, I should like to leave all those sort of decisions to you,’ said
Er-jie hurriedly. ‘I haven’t been here very long and have no experience of running a
household. I’m not able to decide things like this for myself. Why don’t you take
charge of these chests and boxes, sister? I have got hardly any things of my own.
Almost everything in this place belongs to Mr Lian.’
Xi-feng told Zhou Rui’s wife to make a mental note of all the movables and have them
carried over later to Er-jie’s new apartment. She then urged Er-jie to dress herself as
quickly as possible for going out, and as soon as she was ready, walked hand in hand
with her to the waiting carriage. Inside the carriage she insisted that Er-jie should sit
beside her on the same seat.
‘This is rather a strait-laced household we are going into,’ Xi-feng confided to Er-jie
when they were alone in the carriage together. ‘Neither the old lady nor Lady Wang
knows a word yet about your marriage. They would probably kill Mr Lian if they
found out that he had married you while he was still in mourning. There is a very
large garden at the mansion which all the young people live in and which other
people very seldom go into. I think when we get back it would be better if you didn’t
meet Their Ladyships straight away but stayed in there for a few days while I think of
some way of explaining about you to them.’
‘I leave all that to you, sister,’ said Er-jie. ‘I will do whatever you think best.’
The boys accompanying the carriage had received advance instructions not to enter
the mansion by the main gate on their return journey but to go straight in at the back.
Descend?ing from the carriage on her arrival, Xi-feng, having first shooed away a knot
of curious bystanders, led Er-jie through the rear entrance of Prospect Garden and
took her to meet Li Wan and the girls in Sweet-rice Village.
By this time nine out of ten of the Garden’s inhabitants had heard about Jia Lian’s
second marriage, and when the news spread that Xi-feng was bringing the new wife
into the Garden, curiosity drew numbers of them to Li Wan’s place to meet her. All
were impressed by her beauty and by her gentle, pleasing manner. After introducing
them, Xi-feng warned each of them individually that she would kill anyone who
mentioned Er-jie’s presence to an outsider. The nannies and maids who worked in
the Garden were all terrified of Xi-feng and knew in any case that Jia Lian’s marrying
a new wife in a period of family and national mourning was a very serious offence.
They needed no persuading, therefore, to have as little to do with the matter as
possible.
Xi-feng had a private word with Li Wan requesting her to look after Er-jie for a few
days while she herself thought of some way of explaining about her to Grandmother
Jia and Lady Wang. Li Wan knew that Xi-feng already had an apartment ready for
Er-jie to move into at her own place and could well understand that a certain amount
of secrecy had to be maintained about a marriage contracted when in mourning; she
could not therefore refuse to give Er-jie temporary lodging.
Xi-feng took Er-jie’s own maids away from her and substituted a servant of her own.
She also gave secret instructions to the older women to keep an eye on Er-jie,
threatening them with the direst penalties if they allowed her to stray outside or
deliberately run away. Having thus disposed of Er-jie for the time being, she went off
to attend to the next stage of her plans. But of that, for the moment, we will say
nothing.
Everyone who knew about this affair was mystified by the strange forbearance that
Xi-feng had so far shown towards her rival and could not help wondering what had
come over her. Er-jie for her part, observing how well all the young people in the
Garden got on together, felt thoroughly reassured about her future in the bosom of
so delightful a family.
But then, after a few days had gone by, there was an unpleasant incident with Mercy,
the new maid whom Xi-feng had given her in place of her own. Er-jie had run out of
hair-oil and told Mercy to run over to Xi-feng’s and ask her for some.
‘I think you might be a bit more considerate, Mrs Er,’ the maid said insolently.
‘Every day of her life Mrs Lian has to dance attendance on Their Ladyships and Lady
Xing, she has two or three hundred servants waiting from daybreak every morning
for a word from her to tell them what to do, she has at least a dozen important
matters and thirty or forty little ones to deal with every day, all the family’s social
contacts to attend to, from Her Grace at the Palace and princes and dukes and other
high-ups down to other families like our own, thousands of taels of silver to approve
the spending of - and you want to go bothering her for some hair-oil! My advice to
you, madam, is to be a bit more patient. After all, your marriage to Mr Lian was
rather a hole-and-corner affair, wasn’t it? It’s only because of Mrs Lian’s unheard of
generosity that you have been treated so well. A less tolerant person might have
turned you out into the gutter - and not much you could have done to stop them!’
At the end of this verbal drubbing Er-jie could only hang her head in silence. If that
was what other people thought about her, minor inconveniences like the lack of
hair-oil would have to be endured.
But that was not the end of it. Following this outburst, Mercy began to grow more
and more careless about serving Er-jie’s meals. Either they came much too early or
much too late, and the food she brought consisted invariably of stale old left-overs.
Er-jie once or twice tried speaking to her about it, but Mercy only glared at her and
lifted her voice up in noisy self-justification. Fearing that if the others heard the
shouting they would think of her as one of those vulgar, shrewish women who are
always quarrelling with their servants, Er-jie felt obliged to drop the matter and put
up with the hardship as best she could.
After a week or so Xi-feng came to visit her. She was all smiles and loving sympathy,
‘my dear’ this and ‘my dear’ that.
‘If the servants are not giving you satisfaction, my dear, or are being insubordinate,
do let me know and I shall have them beaten.’
She turned and spoke harshly to the maids and older women who were present.
‘I know you lot. I know how you bully the gentle ones. It’s only the hard ones like
me that you are afraid of. Once out of my sight you think you can get away with
murder. But take care! If I hear one word of complaint from Mrs Er, I shall have you
slaughtered!’
Er-jie was impressed by the concern that Xi-feng showed for her.
‘With her to stick up for me,’ she thought, ‘there is really no need for me to do
anything myself. Servants often are insolent. If I speak up about this girl and get her
into trouble, people will say that I lack the forbearance that a wife - especially one in
my position - is always supposed to show.’
And so, far from complaining, she covered up for Mercy and the other servants and
insisted that the service they gave her was satisfactory.
*
All this time Brightie was making inquiries on Xi-feng's behalf into Er-jie's background.
He quickly established that Er-jie had indeed been previously betrothed. Her
affianced, now a young man of nineteen, was a gambler and a wastrel. After
gambling his way through all his family's possessions, he had been turned out of
doors by his father and now made the gambling-dens his home. The fact that his
father had been to see Mrs You and received twenty taels from her in return for
breaking off the engagement was still unknown to him. The name of this
unpromising youth was, as Joker had said, Zhang Hua. When Brightie passed this
information on to Xi-feng, she promptly wrapped twenty taels up in a packet and told
him to go back and promise them to Zhang Hua if he would bring a written
indictment against Jia Lian before the court. It should say that Jia Lian had, in a
period of both national and private mourning and without the knowledge or consent
of his parents, brought unlawful pressure to bear on the plaintiff's parents, causing
them to break off an existing engagement between the plaintiff and his betrothed,
and had then, setting his own wife aside in an unlawful manner, taken to wife the
plaintiff's betrothed in her stead.
A strong instinct of self-preservation at first prompted Zhang Hua to refuse. When
Brightie told Xi-feng this she was furious. A young idiot, she called him; a lame dog
who wouldn't allow one to help him over the stile.
‘You will have to explain it to him very carefully. Tell him he can charge this family
with high treason for all I care; all I want is a pretext for making it hot for them. But
tell him that if things show any sign of getting too hot, I am perfectly well able to cool
them down again.’
Another idea occurred to her as Brightie was on the point of leaving.
‘He could put your name on the indictment,’ she said. ‘Then you could go along to
the court and answer it yourself.’
She gave him careful instructions as to what in that event he should say and do,
assuring him that she would be able to handle the consequences herself. Confident
of her support, Brightie persuaded Zhang Hua to write out an indictment in which he
himself would be named.
‘ “Lai" is the surname,’ he said. ‘Put “Brightie Lai was principal agent of the
accused.” You can say that everything Mr Lian did he was put up to doing by me.’
What Brightie was now proposing seemed to Zhang Hua much less risky than what
he had suggested previously, and after some preliminary discussion about the exact
form that the indictment should take, he wrote it out and went along with it next
morning to the Court of Censors to ‘cry injury’ on the steps outside. An usher came
out to relieve him of it and take it inside to their lordships, and in due course the
court came into session and the presiding Censor found himself reading a bill of
indictment in which a certain ‘Brightie Lai, servant of the above’ appeared as chief
accomplice of the accused. Under the circumstances it seemed most expedient to
have ‘Brightie Lai, servant of the above’ summoned before the court.
Somewhat overawed by the prospect of making an arrest in Rong-guo House, the
blackcoats sent one of their number ahead of them with a message; but Brightie,
who was expect?ing the summons, intercepted the messenger and was outside in
the street waiting for them when they arrived. He stepped forward and offered
himself to them with a disarming smile.
‘I’m afraid you have been troubled on my account, gentlemen, for I think I must be
the person you have come for. Here you are: slip your chain on!’
He stretched his neck out in readiness; but the blackcoats declined.
‘That’s all right, brother. You just come along quietly. Nobody’s going to put any
chains on you!’
When Brightie arrived in the court he knelt down facing the tribunal, side by side
with Zhang Hua but at a little distance away from him. The Censor ordered him to be
shown the indictment, and Brightie, although he had virtually dictated it himself,
affected to study it very carefully. When he had finished doing so, he handed it back
again and kotowed.
‘I know all about this, my lord. It’s true what it says there about my master, but it
wasn’t really anything to do with me. Zhang Hua has only dragged me into it because
he has a personal grudge against me. The person who put my master up to all this
was someone else. Your Lordship ought to ask him about this other person.’
It was Zhang Hua’s turn now to kotow.
‘There is another person involved, my lord, but I didn’t dare to accuse him, so I put
one of the servants’ names instead.’
Brightie pretended to be indignant.
‘Tell his lordship who it is, you fool! This is a court of law we are in and one of the
Emperor’s judges you are speaking to. You’ve got to tell him the name of the person,
no matter who it is.’
Zhang Hua admitted that Jia Rong was the person in question, whereupon the Censor,
very much against his inclination, had to issue a summons for Jia Rong.
Xi-feng had secretly sent her page Cheerful to the court to see if the case was going
forward. When he came back to her with this news, she hastily sent for a member of
her father’s household called Wang Xin, explained to him what had been happening,
and told him to see the Censor on her behalf. He was to persuade the Censor to give
Jia Rong a good scare, but not to proceed to any damaging judgement against him.
She also gave him three hundred taels with which to streng?then his persuasion.
That night Wang Xin saw the Censor in his private chambers and obligingly supplied
him with a little ‘background infor?mation’ to the case. The Censor had a pretty good
idea of what was expected of him. He took the proffered bribe with? out demur and
agreed that at the next hearing it would almost certainly be discovered that Zhang
Hua was a thoroughly worthless character who had brought these trumped-up
charges against the Jias because he owed them money and could not pay it back.
Wang Xin also obtained a brief interview with the President of the Court of Censors
at his private residence. The President was an old friend of Xi-feng’s uncle, Wang
Zi-teng. He had observed that the defendants in this case were all members of the Jia
family and was most anxious that it should be disposed of as expeditiously and with
as little fuss as possible. He had made no recommendation for special action against
the defendants as holders of commissions under the Crown, but merely confirmed
what the Censor of the day had already decided: that Jia Rong should be summoned
and should be required to answer the indictment.
By this time Xi-feng’s discovery and Er-jie’s removal into Prospect Garden were
already known about in Ning-guo House, and Jia Rong and his father were anxiously
discussing this latest development in Jia Lian’s affairs when someone arrived to give
warning of the impending summons and urge them to think quickly what they would
do. Jia Rong, who had gone into the front part of the mansion to receive the
messenger, came rushing back in a panic to tell his father.
‘The man has an infernal nerve!’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘I thought I’d taken sufficient
precautions against anything like this happening.’
He sealed two hundred taels up in a packet and sent it as a sweetener to the Censor.
At the same time he ordered one of his senior domestics to go and answer the
summons. He and Jia Rong were still discussing this new crisis when a cry went up
that ‘Mrs Lian of Rong-guo House’ had arrived. This was a most unpleasant surprise.
Father and son both attempted to make a getaway, but Xi-feng was already inside the
courtyard before they could disappear.
‘Ah, the head of the family!’ she called after the elder of the two retreating backs.
‘You’ve been putting your cousin up to some nice tricks lately, haven’t you?’
Jia Rong, as a junior, was obliged to go back and greet her. She seized him by the
hand and marched on, with him in tow, towards the interior of the mansion.
‘Take good care of your aunt, Rong,’ Cousin Zhen called out after them. ‘Tell them
to slaughter some fresh meat for her dinner.’
He called for his horse and went off to hide himself elsewhere.
Xi-feng walked through into the main sitting-room inside. You-shi came out of the
inner room to greet her.
‘What is it, Feng?’ she asked, observing Xi-feng’s ugly expression. ‘Something has
upset you.’
Xi-feng spat in her face.
‘Nobody else wanted that precious sister of yours, so you had to foist her onto our
family. Anyone would think all the other men in the world had died and only our Jia
ones were left! But even if you’d set your heart on marrying her to a Jia, at least you
might have done it properly, with go-betweens and witnesses and everything open
and above-board. At least we should all have known where we were then and been
able to keep up some sort of appearances. I can’t think what could have come over
you. Was it some phlegm that got into your heart? Was it rouge you’d swallowed,
clogging up your thinking-tubes? Just what was it that made you think you could
marry her to him at a time like that - a time when he was in double mourning: state
mourning and family mourning? Now, thanks to you, we’ve got someone suing us: so
even the people in the law-courts know what a jealous shrew I am and I have to sit
by as helpless as a crab with no legs while total strangers discuss my character and
wonder why my husband doesn't divorce me. What have I done wrong since I came
to this place that you should want to treat me like this? Is it something that Grandma
or Aunt Wang said that has made you set this trap for me, to get me out of the way?
Let’s go to court together, the two of us, and state our cases; and after that, let’s
come back here and ask for a family council so that we can have it all out into the
open, face to face. You can give me a bill of divorce then if you want to, and I shall go
back to my own people.’
She began to cry noisily, tugging at You-shi’s arm and insisting that she should go
with her to court. Jia Rong, in a desperate attempt to dissuade her, threw himself
down on his knees and knocked his head repeatedly on the floor, entreating his aunt
to ‘control her rage’. Xi-feng let go of You-shi and rounded savagely on Jia Rong.
‘Black-hearted villain! May God’s lightning strike you and the devils tear your
carcase! You’re as stupid as mud, and yet you are forever meddling and interfering in
what doesn’t concern you, forever busybodying away at your dirty, scoundrelly little
plots that in the end will ruin your family and destroy the lot of us. Nobody wants
you - even the ghosts won’t want you when you die, your own mother’s ghost or the
ghosts of your ancestors. Don’t you dare tell me what I ought to do!’
And she began beating him. Jia Rong redoubled the frequency of his kotows.
‘Please, auntie, please! Don’t give way to anger. Don’t think only of what has just
happened: try to remember the good things as well as the bad. I may be very wicked,
but surely in a thousand days there must have been one day when I was good! I
know you have every reason to be angry with me, but there is no need for you to
punish me yourself. I will gladly do it for you if it will help you to overcome your
anger.’
He spread his arms out to left and right of him and began to deal himself hefty slaps
upon both cheeks, prefacing each blow with an interrogation, thus:
'Are you going to go on doing these stupid, meddlesome things in future?' (slap!)
‘Are you going to go on listening to Uncle instead of doing what Auntie tells you?’
(slap!)
‘How can you bear to be so cruel and unnatural to Auntie, when Auntie has always
been so good and kind to you?' (slap!)
The others felt like telling him to stop playing the fool. They also felt like laughing,
but did not dare to. Xi-feng threw herself upon You-shi's bosom, weeping and wailing
in a fine display of histrionic grief.
‘I don’t mind your finding him another wife, but why was it necessary to make him
break the law? Why did you let him do it without his father knowing? And why did
you have to destroy my reputation while you were about it? You and I must go to the
court together before the blackcoats come here and arrest us. After that we can go
next door and have it all out in front of Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang and all the
rest of the clan. If it’s found that I am an undutiful wife who refuses to let her
husband take a concubine, you can give me a bill of divorce and I shall leave without
a murmur. As a matter of fact I have invited your sister here myself. I haven’t dared
tell Grandmother and Lady Wang about her yet because I was afraid they would be
angry. At the moment she is living in the Garden, like a princess, with nothing but the
best to eat and servants to wait on her hand and foot every minute of the day.
Meanwhile I’ve been getting an apartment ready for her at home which will be
exactly the same as my own. I’d been meaning to move her in there as soon as
Grandmother had been told about her. I was prepared to live in peace and harmony
with her and Lian and to let bygones be bygones. But now it turns out that all the
time she was betrothed to somebody else! What a mess you’ve made of things! Of
course, I knew nothing about this before. When they told me yesterday that I was
being sued, I was panic-stricken. I knew that even if I appeared in court to answer the
charge myself, it was the Jia family that would be disgraced. So I’m afraid I took five
hundred taels of Lady Wang’s money without telling her, to bribe the Censor with.
And even after that, he still has my servant there in custody.’
All this was spoken not as continuous discourse but punctuated by fits of weeping. In
her final outburst the weeping turned almost into a scream as she began invoking her
parents and her ancestors and threatening to hang or drown herself or batter her
brains out against a wall. You-shi, whom all this time she had not let go of, was so
mauled and crumpled that she was beginning to take on some of the aspects of a
piece of well-kneaded dough and various parts of her clothing had become damp and
discoloured with the moisture from Xi-feng’s eyes and nose. As there was nothing
much she could say in answer to Xi-feng, she shouted at Jia Rong instead.
‘Stupid little fool! A fine mess you and your rather have made of things between
you! I said at the time that no good would come of this.’
Xi-feng took You-shi's head in both her hands and, drawing her face close to her own,
pretended to inspect the inside of her mouth.
‘Who’s stupid? There isn’t an aubergine in here. I see no sign of a gag. Why couldn't
you have come and told me? If you had told me about it at the time, none of this
would ever have happened. But no, you have to wait until it has got into the
law-courts and the whole household is in an uproar, and now you start blaming them!
There’s a very old saying: “A good lining gives a garment strength and a husband with
a good wife has few calamities.” If you’d been a good wife to Zhen, he and the others
would never have got up to this mischief. You haven’t the wit to k anything useful;
and as for saying - for all the good sense that ever comes out of your mouth you
might as well be a bottle! You seem to think that you have only got to sit tight and do
nothing and people will praise you for your virtue!’
She spat two or three times in quick succession.
‘I did try,’ said You-shi tearfully. ‘The others here will tell you, if you don’t believe
me. I tried very hard to dissuade them. It’s not my fault that they wouldn’t listen.
What was I supposed to do? But I don’t blame you for being angry. It’s just one more
thing that I shall have to bear.’
All the Ning-guo concubines, maids and womenservants were by now silently
entreating for their mistress, so that the room seemed suddenly to have filled with
row upon row of kneeling figures. The most senior of the servants now smilingly
addressed Xi-feng on her mistress’s behalf.
‘You’re generally such a wise, understanding person, Mrs Lian: even though our
mistress is at fault, you ought not to be too hard on her - leastways, not in front of us
servants. You and our mistress have always been such good friends. Leave her a bit of
face now, please!’
She handed her a cup of tea, but Xi-feng dashed it to the floor. After a bit she did,
however, stop crying and rolled up her hair, which had come undone. But the tone in
which she addressed Jia Rong was still an angry one.
‘Go and fetch your father. There’s something I want to ask him to his face. I want to
ask him about this new rule which says that a man may marry when he is in
mourning, barely thirty-five days after his uncle’s death. It’s something I’ve never
heard of before. I should like him to tell me about it so that I shall be able to teach it
to the younger generation.’
Jia Rong kotowed and remained upon his knees.
‘This business had nothing to do with either of my parents,’ he said, ‘I was the one
who put Uncle up to it. I don’t know what came over me; I must have been out of my
mind. My rather knows nothing about it. If you insist on having it out with him, he
will undoubtedly kill me. I’d rather you punished me yourself - in fact, I should
welcome it. As for the lawsuit, I’m quite incapable of handling a big thing like that
myself. One “bides a broken arm inside one’s sleeve”: surely you, of all people, know
that, Auntie? You’ve got a very silly nephew, I’m afraid, and he has done a very silly
thing. There’s nothing for it, you will just have to deal with the matter for us, as you
would if your cat or your dog had done something naughty and you had to clear up
after it. Imagine you had a good-for-nothing son like me who had got himself into
terrible trouble: wouldn’t you still go on caring for him, in spite of all the suffering he
had caused you?’
He concluded by kotowing again and looked as if he might go on doing so indefinitely.
His pathetic abjectness soon melted Xi-feng; but she could not change her tune too
abruptly when there were so many pairs of eyes watching her. She did not answer
him, therefore, but merely raised him up with a sigh and, wiping her eyes, addressed
herself once more to You-shi.
‘You must forgive me, kinswoman. It’s because I am so young and inexperienced.
When I heard that there was someone suing us, I simply lost my head. That’s why I
have been behaving so badly. As Rong says, “One hides a broken arm inside one’s
sleeve”: I must ask you to forget all those nasty things I was saying just now and have
a word with Zhen on my behalf to see if he can’t get this lawsuit settled out of court.’
‘Certainly.’
‘Of course.’
In their eagerness to reassure her, You-shi and Jia Rong answered her simultaneously.
‘Whatever happens, Auntie,’ said Jia Rong, ‘I promise you that Uncle Lian won’t be
involved. You mentioned just now that you had already had to spend five hundred
taels on this case. Mother and I will certainly find some way of making that good. We
can’t possibly allow you to be out of pocket because of this. That would be
unthinkable. We must ask one thing of you, though. Do, please, cover up for us at the
other house. Please don’t let Grandma and Lady Wang get to know about this!’
Xi-feng answered him scornfully.
‘You were willing enough to go over my head when you planned this thing in the
first place. Now that it’s gone wrong and you need someone to cover up for you,
you’ve decided that you need me after all. I may be stupid, but I’m not that stupid!’
Again she ignored him and addressed herself to You?shi. ‘Your Cousin Lian is my
husband, don’t forget. You all say that you acted as you did out of your concern that
he should have an heir. Well, don’t you think I share in that concern myself? I look on
your sister as if she were my own. I was so happy when I first heard about her and
Lian that I couldn’t sleep all night. I wanted the servants to start decorating a room
for her immediately, so that I could have her to come and live with us. But you know
what servants are. They told me I was too hasty and that I ought to tell Grandmother
and Lady Wang first. I certainly wasn’t going to take that advice, and I threatened
them with all sorts of pains and penalties if they said anything about it to anyone
themselves. Unfortunately my threatening was of no avail. Just as I thought I’d
succeeded in hushing the matter up, the very worst thing happened: a person called
Zhang Hua suddenly popped up out of nowhere and brought a lawsuit against us. I
was so scared that for two nights I didn’t sleep a wink. I didn’t dare tell anyone else
about it. All I could do was to get the servants to try to find out who this Zhang Hua
was and what it was that had made him so bold. After two days investigating they
came back and told me. It seems that he is a thoroughly worthless character - a
down-and-out. “Mrs Er is this man’s betrothed,” they said. “At the present moment
he is so hard up that sooner than die of hunger and cold, he is prepared to do almost
anything. This lawsuit is simply a last desperate attempt to make some money. He
reckons that even if he dies in the attempt it will be a better death than starving.
Anyway,” they said, “you can hardly blame him for trying. The master really has been
a bit hasty: marrying during a period of national mourning is one offence; marrying in
a period of family mourning is another; marrying without parental con?sent is a third;
and marrying bigamously is a fourth. They say that the man sentenced to death by a
thousand cuts will dare to pull the Emperor off his horse. A man like this Zhang Hua
who is crazed by poverty will do anything. With such good arguments in his favour,
he’d be a fool not to sue!” Well now, I ask you! Even if I’d been a forensic genius,
which I’m not, hearing them say that would have been enough to shut me up. What
could I do? Lian was away. There was no one at hand to advise me. All I could think of
was to try and buy him off. But the trouble is, the more you give to people like that,
the more they twist the knife in you and think up more and more pretexts for getting
money out of you. And I am like a boil on a mouse’s tail: there’s a limit to what can
be squeezed out of me. It was because I was feeling so desperate that I -’
‘Don’t worry about the money,’ You-shi and Jia Rong both chimed in, not waiting
for her to finish. ‘That’s something we can certainly take care of for you.’
‘If Zhang Hua is only suing because he wants money,’ said Jia Rong, ‘I think I can
now see what to do. We must promise him money on condition that he will admit
that the charges he brought against us were false ones. Of course, we shall have to
spend a bit of money to see that he isn’t too heavily proceeded against; but once the
case has been dismissed and he has been released, all we have to do is give him the
money we promised, and that should be the end of it.’
Xi-feng tutted and looked amused.
‘Brilliant! No wonder you made such a mess of your match-making if this is the way
you go about things! I always thought that you were intelligent, but I see now that I
was wrong. If we do as you suggest, he will pretend to agree, the case will be called
off, and that will appear to be the end of it. But don’t you see, if you put money into
the hand of a fellow like that, he will get through it in about four or five days and
then think up some other villainy as a means of getting more? Even though we have
nothing to fear from him, he will still be a constant source of worry. What you
propose in any case plays straight into his hands, because it enables him to say that
we must have something to be ashamed of or we wouldn’t be offering him money.’
Jia Rong was a sharp young man and quickly saw what his aunt was driving at.
‘I’ve got another idea,’ he said. ‘Perhaps I should be the one to clear this mess up
after all, since I am the one who got us into it. I shall ask Zhang Hua straight out what
his inten?tions are. Is it definitely Aunt Er he wants, or is he willing to make do with
someone else if we will give him the money? If it is definitely Aunt Er and no one else
will do, I shall simply have to break it to her that she must go and join him.’
‘That’s all very well, but I don’t want to part with your Aunt Er,’ said Xi-feng
hurriedly. ‘In fact, I refuse to hear of it. Even suppose she were willing, what would
people think of us if we allowed her to go? No, I think we must keep her, even if it
means giving him more money.’
Jia Rong knew perfectly well that although Xi-feng said this, she was secretly longing
to get rid of Er-jie and was merely anxious that if she did so it should be with her
reputation for womanly virtue untarnished. He deemed it safest not to dispute with
her, however, but merely to agree with everything she said.
‘This outside part of the business should not be too hard to settle,’ said Xi-feng. ‘In
the long run it’s here at home that we are going to have the difficulty. Hadn’t you
better come with me to explain all about this to Grandmother and Lady Wang?’
This threw You-shi into another panic. She seized Xi-feng by the hand and earnestly
entreated her to think of some lie which would obviate this necessity.
‘If you are not capable of dealing with the consequences, you ought not to do these
things in the first place,’ said Xi-feng coldly. ‘Really! It quite disgusts me to hear you
bleat like this! Oh well. I wasn’t going to help you out of this fix, but I am such a weak,
soft-hearted creature. I suppose I shall have to. You’d better stay out of this, then. I’ll
take your sister on my own to make her kotow to Grandmother and the ladies. I shall
say that this is your sister and that I have taken a great fancy to her. I shall tell them
that because I haven’t so far managed to give Lian a son, I had been thinking of
buying two girls to serve him as chamber-wives, but that since seeing your sister I
had thought how much nicer it would be to have her instead as his Number Two and
keep it all inside the family. Then I shall say that since her mother and sister died she
has been living in very reduced circumstances and would have found it impossible to
hold out on her own until the end of the hundred days mourning, so I have taken it
upon myself to invite her here to live with us. I shall tell them that I’ve already had a
room made ready for her and would like her to move in there as a temporary
measure until the mourning period is over and she is allowed to sleep with Lian. All
lies, of course, but I am sufficiently brazen to get away with them. Even if there is any
trouble, I promise that it shan’t come near you. Well, what about it? Do you think
that will do?’
You-shi and Jia Rong were all smiles.
‘Very handsome of you, and very resourceful, too. But then you always were both
of those things. When this affair is safely out of the way, we shall come round and
make you a kotow.’
‘Fiddlestick! I don’t want your kotows,’ said Xi-feng. ‘She pointed her finger at Jia
Rong. I know you now for what you are.’
Her face reddened as she said this, and for a moment she seemed on the point of
tears. Jia Rong put on his most winning smile.
‘Come on now, forgive and forget, won’t you, just this once?’
He knelt once more, but she turned her head away and ignored him. He got to his
feet again, still smiling.
You-shi made the servants bring a basin of water and a vanity-box, so that. Xi-feng
could wash her face and hands and comb her hair, and gave orders to hurry on the
dinner. Xi-feng insisted that she must go back, but You-shi was equally insistent that
she should stay and eat with them.
‘If you go off now like this, how shall we ever have the face to visit you at your
place in the future?’
Jia Rong added his own smiling persuasion.
‘Come on, Auntie! I promise that in future I shall serve you as a truly devoted
nephew, strike me dead if I don’t!’
Xi-feng gave him a look.
‘Pshaw! Who believes -?’
     But she did not finish.
The maids and old women had been busy meanwhile laying the table. You-shi made
a selection from the dishes with her own chopsticks to put on Xi-feng’s plate and Jia
Rong knelt down beside her and offered her a cupful of wine. When Xi-?feng and
You-shi had eaten, a maid served them with tea to rinse their mouths with and then
with a better tea to drink. After a couple of sips of the latter, Xi-feng rose to go. Jia
Rong saw her all the way back to her own place.
As soon as she was back, Xi-feng went into the Garden to tell Er-jie about these latest
developments. She told her how worried she had been when she heard about the
lawsuit, and what she had found out as a result of her inquiries. Then she explained
what had to be done now in order to ensure that none of the others got into trouble.
But if you want to know how Xi-feng’s plan turned out in the event, you will have to
read the following chapter.
CHAPTER 69

A scheming woman kills
with a borrowed knife
And one who has ceased to hope
swallows gold and dies



Er-jie was full of gratitude when she heard what Xi-feng was planning to do for her
and gladly accompanied her to the inner mansion. You-shi, feeling that - in spite of
what had been agreed - she could hardly stay away when her own step-sister was
being formally presented to the family, went along with them, on the express
understanding that she herself would say nothing and that, in the event of there
being any opposi?tion, Xi-feng would take sole responsibility.
When the three of them arrived in Grandmother Jia’s apartment, the old lady was
talking to Bao-yu and the girls - such conversations, enlivened by much joking and
laughter, being nowadays her principal source of amusement. Seeing Xi-feng come in
accompanied by a beautiful young woman, she screwed up her eyes and peered at
the latter with curiosity.
‘Well now, who is this charming young person?’
‘Have a good look, Grandma,’ said Xi-feng, taking Er-jie by the hand and drawing
her forwards. ‘Tell me what you think of her. - Quick, make your kotow!’ she
whispered to Er-jie. ‘This is Lian’s grandmother.’
When Er-jie had completed her obeisance, Xi-feng pointed to each of the cousins in
turn and told her their names.
‘You can make your curtseys to them later, after you have been to see Their
Ladyships,’ she said.
Er-lie had to greet each of the cousins by name, as if she were meeting them for the
first time. After that she stood, with head demurely lowered, to one side.
Having studied her face for some moments, Grandmother Jia raised her head to think,
but presently gave up with a laugh.
‘It’s no good,’ she said. ‘I can’t think who it is. But I’m sure I’ve seen her somewhere
else before.’
‘Never mind about that, Grandma,’ said Xi-feng laughing. ‘Just tell me what you
think of her. Is she prettier than me?’
Grandmother Jia put on a pair of spectacles.
‘Bring the child a little closer,’ she told Faithful and Amber. ‘Let me have a look at
her skin.’
Amid suppressed titters from the others present, Er-jie was hustled forward.
Grandmother Jia looked her up and down very carefully.
‘Hold her hand out,’ she said to Amber. ‘Let me look at her hand.’
When the hand had been inspected, Grandmother Jia took off her spectacles and
laughed.
‘Flawless. Yes, she’s prettier than you.’
Xi-feng laughed too, then, kneeling down, proceeded to repeat, more or less word for
word, what she had told You-shi she would say.
‘Will you be very kind and let her stay here, Grandma? She wouldn’t begin living
with Lian until next year, when she is out of mourning.’
‘Yes, that’s perfectly all right,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Very good of you to have
suggested it. I’m very glad. Provided, as you say, that she and Lian don’t start sleeping
together until next year.’
Xi-feng kotowed. Then she asked Grandmother Jia if she would mind deputing two of
her women to take Er-jie round to see Lady Xing and Lady Wang, and whether it
would be all right for them to say that Er-jie was being installed on Grandmother Jia’s
initiative. The old lady consented and Er-jie was led off to see the other ladies.
Xi-feng’s failure to take adequate steps for procuring her husband an heir had for
some time now been a source of anxiety to Lady Wang, for she knew that her niece’s
reputation must be suffering as a consequence. She was therefore delighted, when
Er-jie was presented to her as Jia Lian’s new concubine, to learn that it was Xi-feng
herself who was responsible for the arrangements. Now that Er-jie’s union with Jia
Lian had been brought into the open, it was possible to move her from the Garden
into the apartment in Xi-feng’s courtyard that had been prepared for her.
Meanwhile Xi-feng’s agents were secretly inciting Zhang Hua to claim his affianced
wife, promising that she would come to him with a generous trousseau and that they
would give him a substantial sum of money to set up house with. It was no easy task
persuading him, since from the very start he had had little stomach for this case. His
apprehensions seemed justified when, in answer to the summons, Jia Rong's
repre?sentative eventually appeared in court and made the following statement:
‘Zhang Hua had already broken off his engagement with the young lady before she
entered our house. She did so, in any case, merely as a kinswoman, already related to
the family by her sister’s marriage. There was never any talk of forcing her into
matrimony. Zhang Hua trumped up this case against my master because my master
was attempting to recover some money owing to him which Zhang Hua was unable
to pay.’
The Censor, whose past connections with both the Jia and Wang families, not to
mention the substantial bribe he had pocketed only the night before, inclined him to
accept this as a reliable version of the facts, ruled that Zhang Hua was a person of
untrustworthy character, driven by destitution to make a number of malicious and
defamatory accusations against the defendants, none of which could be
substantiated. The charges in the indictment were dismissed and Zhang Hua was
sentenced to be flogged and driven from the court. By distributing money in the right
quarters, Cheerful was able to ensure that the flogging administered was a light one
and got to work again on Zhang Hua as soon as it was over.
‘There’s no question you were betrothed to this girl. If you go back and tell them
that it’s the girl you want and nothing else, they’re sure to give judgement in your
favour.’
Zhang Hua was induced to do this and the court, after further persuasions from
Wang Xin, did in fact give judgement in his favour.
‘Zhang Hua is to repay the full amount owed by him to the Jia family within the
period specified. But provided that he does so, his affianced wife is to be restored to
him as soon as he is in a position to receive her.’
This judgement was confirmed in the presence of Zhang Hua’s father, who was
specially summoned to the Court of Censors to hear it. When Cheerful explained to
the old man that this meant that he and his son were to get not only the promised
money but also Er-jie and her trousseau as well, he was naturally delighted and at
once went along to the Jia mansion to claim the bride. Xi-feng went in feigned alarm
to report this latest development to Grandm6ther Jia.
‘It’s all the fault of Cousin Zhen’s wife,’ she said. ‘It seems that the Zhang family had
never agreed to break off this earlier engagement, and now they have sued us and
the court has given judgement against us.’
Grandmother Jia summoned You-shi from the other man?sion and rebuked her for
her carelessness.
‘It seems that your sister’s betrothal before she was born to this Zhang person was
never properly broken off, and now his family are suing us. I can’t imagine what you
thought you were at when you made this arrangement!’
‘But it was broken off,’ You-shi protested. ‘They even took our money.’
‘When Zhang Hua was giving evidence, he said he’d never seen any money,’ Xi-feng
chipped in. ‘He said no one had ever approached him about breaking off the
engagement. His father said your step-mother mentioned something about breaking
it off but there was nothing final. He said that when your step-mother died, you
moved your sister in regardless and married her to Lian as his Number Two. No one
present at the time was able to refute those statements, so they were able to get
away with them. It’s a good job Lian hasn’t slept with the girl yet. As far as that goes,
there is nothing to stop her going back to Zhang. The only thing is, it would be a
frightful loss of face for us to let her go again having once moved her in.’
‘Yes, but as you say, Lian hasn’t touched her yet,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It would be
even worse for our reputation to hold on to someone who by rights is somebody
else’s wife. Much better hand her over to him. We can easily find someone else for
Lian.’
‘The engagement really was broken off,’ said Er-jie, and named the date on which it
had occurred. ‘My mother gave the Zhangs twenty taels for doing it. It must be
because they are so hard up that they have brought this case against you. The things
they have been saying are quite untrue. My sister made no mistake.’
It only goes to show how dangerous people like this are to provoke,’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘Well, in that case, Feng, you had better go and see what you can
do about it.’
Whatever reluctance she may have felt, Xi-feng was obliged to say that she would.
She had Jia Rong summoned to her room to talk to him about it. Jia Rong knew her
feelings well enough - but after all, how could a family like the Jias really contemplate
handing over one of their women to a beggar? The idea was preposterous. When he
reported the conversa?tion to his father, Cousin Zhen sent someone to have a word
privately with Zhang Hua.
‘Look here, you’ve had a lot of money out of them,’ the man said. ‘Why do you
have to have the woman as well? If you insist too hard, my master is likely to start
getting angry with you, and frankly I wouldn’t give much for your chances if he does.
Why don’t you and your father go back to where you came from? With the money
you’ve already got you’d have no difficulty in finding yourself a very nice little wife,
and if you decide to go away, I can promise you some more money towards your
travel expenses.’
This sounded to Zhang Hua like good advice, and after talking it over with his father,
he agreed that if the money he had already received were to be made up to a total of
one hundred taels, he and his father would undertake to make themselves scarce.
The money was handed over, and father and son rose at four o’clock next morning to
begin the journey back to their native village. As soon as he had made sure of their
departure, Jia Rong went round to tell Grandmother Jia and Xi-feng.
‘Zhang Hua and his father have run away. The charges in the indictment were all
fabricated and they lost their nerve because they thought they were going to be
found out. The court knows all the facts now but has decided not to prosecute. So
that is the end of the affair.’
Xi-feng was not as put out by this as might have been expected.
‘After all,’ she told herself, ‘even if I had insisted on Zhang Hua taking her away,
there was always the possibility that Lian might get back in time to reclaim her. He
would only have had to give Zhang a little money and Zhang would surely not have
refused to give her back. Perhaps it’s just as well that she’s staying here. I have her
here safely under my thumb while I think of some other way of dealing with her. But I
don’t like this idea of Zhang going off nobody knows where. Suppose he talks? Or
suppose one day he finds some means of reopening the case? Everything I have done
up to now will turn out to have been simply working towards my own downfall. Oh, I
should never have put a weapon like this into somebody else’s hand!’
She began to grow more and more worried and eventually thought of a plan. Calling
Brightie to her she told him to find out where Zhang Hua was and procure his death,
either by laying a false accusation of robbery against him and leaving it to the
magistrates and yamen runners to finish him off judicially, or else by employing an
assassin. Only by such root-and-branch methods, she felt, could her fears be allayed
and the threat to her reputation be removed.
Brightie went off agreeing to do what she had asked, but when he got home and had
time to think about it, he began to feel misgivings.
‘The fellow’s already gone away,’ he thought. ‘Surely that’s the end of the matter?
Why does she need to make such a great issue of it? Taking a man’s life is no
children’s game; it’s a serious business. I’ll just have to humour her for the time being
and think of some way out of this later.’
Having so resolved, he went into hiding for a few days before coming back and
reporting to Xi-feng.
‘Three days after Zhang Hua and his father ran away, somewhere near Jing-kou in
the early hours of the morning Zhang Hua was knocked down and killed by a
highwayman for the sake of the money he was carrying. The old man died of a
heart-attack shortly afterwards in a near-by inn. There was an inquest on the bodies
and both of them were buried there, where it happened.’
Xi-feng did not believe him.
‘I’ll probably be sending someone to make inquiries shortly,’ she said. ‘If I find out
that you’ve been lying, I’ll have every tooth in your head broken.’
But in the event she did nothing and let the matter drop.
From that time onwards her demeanour towards Er-jie was affable in the extreme.
No sister could have shown a greater interest in her well-being.
*
A day came when Jia Lian’s business was at last transacted and he was able to start
on his much-delayed journey back home. On his arrival in the city he called in first at
the new house in order to see Er-jie, but he found the place locked and empty with
only an aged caretaker in occupation. When, in answer to his questions, the old man
told him what had happened, he stamped in his stirrups with vexation; but there was
no time for indulging his feelings, for he had shortly to present himself before his
parents and report to them on the successful conclusion of his mission.
Jia She was for once very pleased with him and praised him for his capability. He gave
him a hundred taels as a reward and a seventeen-year-old girl from his own room
called Autumn as a concubine. Jia Lian kotowed to receive his presents. He felt
enormously pleased with himself; but there was a slightly hang-dog expression on his
face when, after he had seen Grandmother Jia and the rest, he appeared once more
before his wife.
To his surprise there were none of the expected recriminations. Xi-feng seemed,
indeed, to have become a different per?son. She came out to meet him with Er-jie at
her side, con?fined herself to questions about his health, his stay in Ping-an and the
journey back home, and made not a single reference to his deception. When the
time came for him to tell her about Autumn, he was unable to prevent a certain
pleased smugness from stealing over his face. At once Xi-feng ordered two of the
married servants to go round in a carriage to collect her. Here was another thorn in
her bosom, even before the first one had been extracted! Yet not a trace of what she
felt was allowed to show itself in her expression. With the same unchanging smile
she ordered a ‘welcome home’ dinner for her husband and took Autumn to make
her kotows to Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang. Jia Lian privately marvelled at the
extra?ordinary change that had come over her.
It need hardly be said that Xi-feng harboured feelings about Er-jie very different from
the ones her outward show of friendliness might have suggested. Once or twice
when they were alone together she confided to her (in a sisterly manner, of course)
that her reputation in the family was a very unsavoury one.
‘There is a nasty little story going around, my dear, that you weren’t all you should
have been before you were married. They say you were much too thick with Cousin
Zhen. I’m afraid even Lady Jia and Lady Wang seem to have got hold of it. They are
beginning to ask me why I picked someone whom no one else would have, and why I
don’t put you away and choose somebody more suitable. Needless to say, when I
first heard this story I was flabbergasted. I’ve tried to find out who started it, but I’ve
had no success. Oh, these servants! Just as I thought I’d done something to feel
proud of, I find that I’ve got a fish’s head like this on my plate to contend with!’
Xi-feng’s sympathy for Er-jie was so great that, after telling her all this a couple of
times, her indignation against these anonymous traducers caused her to become
quite ill; she re?fused all food and drink and began to spend the greater part of her
time lying down in her room. The servants, with the sole exception of Patience,
speculated freely about the cause of their mistress’s illness, and Er-jie, though
seldom named, came in for frequent criticism.
Because Autumn had been presented to Jia Lian by his father, she had a very high
opinion of her own importance, showing scant respect for Patience or even for
Xi-feng, let alone for a poor, unwanted creature like Er-jie, who was commonly
known to have been a fallen woman before she married. When Xi-feng noticed this
she was secretly pleased.
Since Xi-feng’s pretended illness, she had ceased to eat with Er-jie, whose meals, on
Xi-feng’s instructions, were now served to her in her own room. Invariably the food
that was given her was inedible. Patience was so disgusted that she took to buying
her things to eat with her own money, or, on the pretext of going for a walk with her
in the Garden, taking her to the Garden kitchen where she could be given nourishing
soups to eat under her supervision. Because it was Patience who did this, none of the
other servants dared to inform against her. Unfortunately Autumn once came upon
them there and, feeling no such compunction, went straight off to denounce her to
Xi-feng.
‘Patience is going out of her way to give you a bad name, Mrs Lian. That Er woman
wastes the good food you give her and goes into the Garden with Patience every day
to sneak food from the kitchen.’
Xi-feng abused Patience angrily.
‘Most people keep a cat to keep down the mice for them. My cat seems to eat the
chickens!’
Patience dared not answer back, and from then on kept away from Er-jie; but she
secretly hated Autumn because of this.
Bao-yu and the girls were privately concerned about Er-jie. Though none of them
would venture to speak out openly on her behalf, they all of them felt sorry for her.
Sometimes, when no one else was about, one or other of them would get into
conversation with her. Invariably she would be crying and wiping her eyes all the time
they were talking to her; but she never uttered a word of complaint against Xi-feng -
indeed, since Xi-feng was careful never to reveal herself in her true colours, it is hard
to see what she could have complained of.
Jia Lian for his part failed to notice that anything was wrong. Since his return he had
been completely taken in by Xi-feng’s show of magnanimity towards her rival; and in
any case he was at present somewhat preoccupied. The sight of his father’s many
maids and concubines had often in the past aroused libidinous feelings in him which
he had perforce repressed; while on her side Autumn had often in the past, by
flutterings of the eyelids and various other signals, ex?pressed a marked interest in
her master’s handsome son. It may be imagined what sort of blaze was kindled in the
brush-wood when two such eager bedfellows were brought together with full
parental approval of their union. Day after day he spent in Autumn’s company –
aye sporting with his new-won bride
in the words of the poet. He seemed, indeed, scarcely able to prise himself away
from her. Gradually, as Autumn became more and more the only centre of his
concern, his former feelings towards Er-jie began to cool.
Xi-feng detested Autumn but was glad to have her as a means of ridding herself of
Er-jie. She would ‘kill with a borrowed knife’ - or rather she would watch the killing
from a safe distance, like a traveller reclining on a mountainside who watches two
tigers tearing each other to pieces in the valley below. And when Autumn had
disposed of Er-jie, Xi-?feng herself would take care of Autumn. Once she had settled
on this strategy, she lost no opportunity, whenever she found herself alone with
Autumn, of stirring her up against her rival.
‘You are so young and headstrong. You ought to be more careful,’ she told her. ‘She
is his second wife, after all. He is very, very fond of her. Even I have to give way to her
a bit. It’s suicide to go constantly provoking her in the way you do.’
This had the desired effect of releasing a stream of abuse against Er-jie, uttered in a
voice that could be heard from one end of the courtyard to the other.
‘You’re too soft with people, Mrs Lian. I wouldn’t behave so meekly if I was in your
place. Where’s all your old authority gone to? You can be forgiving if you like, but if
I’ve got a smut in my eye, I like to get it out. You just let me get at that whore, I’ll give
her a piece of my mind!’
Xi-feng pretended to be too scared of Autumn to rebuke her; but Er-jie, listening in
her room, spent the whole day crying and was too upset to eat. She did not dare to
tell Jia Lian what the matter was when he called in to see her, and next morning,
when Grandmother Jia noticed that her eyes were red and swollen with weeping and
asked her what the matter was, she would not say.
This was just the sort of opportunity that Autumn was waiting for. ‘She’s very good at
putting on this dying duck act,’ she confided to Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang
when Er-jie had gone. ‘We get this from her all the time. It’s because she hates
sharing. She wishes that Mrs Lian and I were dead so that she could have Mr Lian all
to herself.’
‘It’s possible to be too attractive,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘They say that a jealous
nature often goes with it. How contemptible to be like that, though - especially when
Feng has gone out of her way to be nice to her! One can see that she has no
breeding.’
From that time onwards she appeared to have taken rather a dislike to Er-jie; and the
servants, when they sensed that Grandmother Jia did not like her, were only too
ready to press forwards and trample on her themselves. Now indeed life for the poor
young woman became a burden, only occasionally alleviated when Patience, acting
behind her mistress’s back and against her wishes, took up the cudgels on her behalf.
How could so gentle a soul, one of those whom Nature, in the words of the poet,
did out of snow and rose-petals compound,
stand up to the barbarities to which she was now daily subjected? After suffering in
silence for a month, she began to show the symptoms of an illness: there was a
weakness and lassitude in her limbs which made moving them an effort; she could
keep nothing down, either food or drink, and seemed to grow thinner and paler ail
the time; and she could not sleep at night. One night, when she was trying to get to
sleep, San-jie appeared to her, carrying the sword that she had cut her throat with.
‘Sister,’ she said, ‘you always were a silly, weak-willed creature. I knew you would
suffer for it in the end. Don’t trust the honied words of that jealous woman!
Outwardly she seems kind and virtuous, but she is treacherous and cunning
under?neath. She hates you and will never rest until she has brought about your
death. If I had been alive, I would never have allowed you to move inside here; or if I
had, I would never have allowed her to treat you like this. But I was fated to kill
myself and you were fated to suffer here alone. That is our punishment, because in
our past lives our wantonness led other folk astray. Sister, you must do as J tell you.
Take this sword, cut off that jealous woman’s head, and come with me to the tribunal
of Disenchantment to await her judgement. You will die in any case, but if you do not
do as I say, you will have died for nothing and no one will feel sorry for you.’
‘Sister,’ said Er-jie, weeping, ‘my whole life has been sinful. You yourself say that my
present sufferings are a punishment. Why should I add the crime of murder to my
other sins?’
San-jie left her sorrowfully, and Er-jie, waking up with a start, realized that she had
been dreaming.
     Next time Jia Lian came to see her she had a tearful disclosure to make.
     ‘This illness I am suffering from will not get better. It is half a year now since I
came to you and already I am with child. It might be the son you want, though of
course we cannot know that until it comes. If Heaven is merciful, I hope I may live
long enough to bear it; but I fear I may die before, and the child with me.’
     ‘You mustn’t worry,’ said Jia Lian, weeping himself. ‘I’ll get a first-rate doctor to
cure this illness.’
     He lost no time in sending for one. Unfortunately the Dr Wang of the Imperial
College who had attended Grandmother Jia and other members of the family in the
past was at present with the Imperial Army in the field (he had some hopes of a
baronetcy on his return) and the pages sent out to summon him ended up by calling
in a colleague of his called Hu Jun-rong - that same doctor, in fact, who had been
called in to attend Skybright a year or two previously. After taking Er-jie’s pulses he
informed Jia Lian that her trouble was ‘irregularity of the menses caused by
anaemia’.
     ‘But are you sure she isn’t pregnant?’ said Jia Lian. ‘It’s three months now since
she had a period, and she is suffering all the time from morning-sickness.’
     When he heard that, Hu Jun-rong asked the old women in attendance if he
might have Er-jie’s arm again. It was thrust out through the curtain and he spent a
long time feeling the pulses in it a second time.
     ‘It’s true that in a case of pregnancy the pulse from the liver would be a strong
one,’ he said finally. ‘On the other hand wood in the ascendant generates fire, which
can by itself cause the drying up of the menstrual fluid: so a strong liver pulse may be
indicative only of an irregularity in the menses and not of pregnancy. I wonder if I
might have a look at the lady's face? Before I finally decide on the right treatment, I
should like to see what sort of colour she has.’
The request was an unusual one, but Jia Lian felt he had no choice but to grant it. The
bed-curtains were drawn back a few inches and Er-jie thrust her head out through
the slit. The vision thus presented to him seemed to deprive the doctor temporarily
of his senses, so that it is doubtful whether he was able to make any observations of
diagnostic value while he was goggling at it. After a moment or two the curtains were
drawn to again and Jia Lian accompanied the doctor outside and once more asked
him for his opinion.
‘It isn’t pregnancy,’ said the doctor. ‘There is some clotted blood which is holding
back the natural discharge. The important thing is to disperse the clot and get her
men?struating again.’
He wrote a prescription out and took his leave. Jia Lian sent someone to pay him and
also to purchase the drugs named in his prescription. The medicine was made up,
infused and taken. From about midnight Er-jie began to suffer from con?tinuous
abdominal pain, and after what seemed hours of agony, produced a foetus already
sufficiently developed to be recognizable as a male child. This was followed by
continuous bleeding in the course of which she fainted away.
Jia Lian cursed Hu Jun-rong bitterly when they told him. He sent someone
immediately to call another doctor. He also sent someone to look for Hu Jun-rong;
but Hu Jun-rong, having got wind of what had happened, had already packed his bags
and disappeared.
The new doctor was not encouraging.
‘Obviously your lady’s constitution was not very robust to start with. It looks to me
as if in the course of her pregnancy she must have been subjected to some sort of
emotional dis?tress resulting in a congestion of the pneuma. By mistakenly attacking
this with a far too drastic dispersant, I am afraid the previous consultant has done a
lot of damage. The vital essence has been eighty or ninety per cent impaired. As
things look at present, I am afraid I really cannot guarantee a cure. I propose a
treatment using both liquid and solid medicines simultaneously. If you can make
quite sure that she neither sees nor hears anything likely to upset her during the
treat?ment, there might be some hope of improvement.’
Having given his diagnosis he departed, but not before writing out two prescriptions,
one for an infusion and one for some pills.
Jia Lian was beside himself. He insisted that the culprit responsible for calling in Hu
Jun-rong should be discovered, and had him beaten within an inch of his life. But Jia
Lian’s distress was as nothing compared with the transports of grief displayed by
Xi-feng.
‘It is beginning to look as if we are fated not to have a son,’ she lamented. ‘To think
that a doctor’s incompetence should ruin everything, just as we were so near to
having one!’
She had a little ‘altar to Heaven and Earth’ set up on which she burned incense and in
front of which she knelt down and prayed with the utmost fervency for Er-jie’s
recovery.
‘Let me be ill instead of her,’ she prayed. ‘Only let You-shi’s sister get well again and
bear us a man-child, and I vow to spend all my remaining days in prayer and fasting.’
Jia Lian and all the others who saw her and heard her pray were filled with
admiration.
While Jia Lian and Autumn were alone together, Xi-feng had all sorts of soups and
invalid slops made specially for Er-jie. She even sent the characters of Er-jie's nativity
to a fortune-teller to have her fortune told. The fortune-teller sent word back that
Er-jie’s stars were temporarily in collision with those of some other female born
under the sign of the Rabbit. A rapid investigation revealed that Autumn was the only
person in the household born under that sign. It was her astral influence that was
harming Er-jie.
The sight of Jia Lian rushing agitatedly about, calling for doctors, ordering medicines,
dispensing curses and floggings among the servants, and in general showing a most
singular devotedness to Er-jie, had already caused Autumn's system to secrete
several gallons of vinegar. Her jealous fury when she was informed that Er-jie’s illness
was due to her influence and when she was urged by Xi-feng to move elsewhere for a
few days in Er-jie’s interest can be imagined.
‘Who pays any attention to what those beggarly swindlers tell you?’ she said. ‘It’s
all rubbish anyway. How can I have any influence on her? I have nothing to do with
her.
The water in the well
And the water in the sea:
I’ve naught to do with you
Or you to do with me.
Precious little darling! She saw plenty of all sorts when she was living outside. She
didn’t suffer from any influences then, why should she start suffering from them now,
I wonder? Anyway, there’s something I’d like to ask her. I’d like to ask her where she
got that child from. She may fool that cotton?eared master of ours. As long as she
gave him a child, it would be all one to him whether it was a Zhang or a Wang. But do
you really care about that whore’s brat, Mrs Lian? I’m damned if I do! What’s so
special about having a baby? Give me a year or ten months and I’ll have one myself -
and it won’t have half the city for its father, either!’
The servants hearing her were at some pains not to laugh. It happened that Lady Xing
had come over that day to pay her respects to Grandmother Jia. Autumn took the
opportunity of complaining to her.
‘Mr and Mrs Lian are trying to drive me out of here. I don’t know which way to turn.
Put in a good word for me, Your Ladyship, I beg of you!’
This led Lady Xing to give Xi-feng a severe telling-off, after which she proceeded to
give a piece of her mind to Jia Lian.
‘Ungrateful wretch! Whatever the girl’s like, she was given to you by Sir She. Fancy
trying to turn her out for the sake of an outsider! Have you no respect for your father
at all?’
She walked off in a huff, giving him no opportunity to explain. Autumn, now
thoroughly cock-a-hoop, stood outside Er-jie’s window and favoured the world at
large with an expanded and even more abusive version of what she had said earlier
to Xi-feng. Er-jie, lying inside, heard every word of it, as she was meant to, and was
deeply distressed.
That night, when Jia Lian and Autumn were in bed together and Xi-feng was asleep in
her own room, Patience went to see Er-jie and tried to comfort her.
‘You must try to get well,’ she said. ‘Don’t take any notice of that animal.’
Er-jie clutched her hand. She was crying weakly as she replied.
‘Sister, you have been so good to me, ever since I came to this place. I don’t know
how much unpleasantness you haven’t had to put up with on my account. If I come
out of this alive, I promise I shall do my best to repay your kindness. I fear I shan’t,
though. I shall have to try and repay you in another life.’
Patience could not help crying too.
‘All these things that have happened to you - it’s all my fault. I was so stupid. I
always told myself that I’d never deceive my mistress, and so when I heard about you
and Mr Lian living together outside, I thought I had to tell her. I never thought it
would all turn out like this.’
‘You’re wrong to blame yourself,’ said Er-jie. ‘She would have found out sooner or
later, even if you hadn’t told her. It was only a question of time. And anyway, I wanted
to come here. I wanted so much to be respectable. It really had nothing to do with
you.’
The two young women wept a while in silence. Once more Patience tried to comfort
her and urged her to get better; then, because it was long past midnight, she left her
to go and get some sleep.
After Patience had gone, Er-jie lay thinking.
‘This illness seems to have got its grip on me. I’m losing rather than gaining all the
time. It doesn’t look as if I shall ever get better. And now that I’ve lost the baby,
there’s nothing much left for me to live for. I don’t have to put up with all this hatred
and malice. Why don’t I just die and get it over with? They say you can die by
swallowing gold. It would be a better way of dying than hanging oneself or cutting
one’s throat.’
She struggled out of bed, opened one of her boxes, and hunted out a nugget of raw
gold. Then she wept a little. It was four o’clock in the morning. Summoning up all the
will-power she could muster, she forced herself to swallow it. She had to hold her
head back and swallow many times before it would go down; but in the end it did.
Then she dressed herself hurriedly in her best clothes, put on her jewellery and
ornaments, laid herself down upon the kang, and sank at once into unconsciousness.
Hearing no call from her next morning, the maids - Xi-feng and Autumn having gone
off to Grandmother Jia’s place for their morning duty - were only too pleased to get
on with their toilets undisturbed. Patience was disgusted by their callousness and
reproached them bitterly.
‘What you girls need is a really hard-hearted mistress - one who would curse you
and beat you every day. There’s a sick woman in there: can’t you feel any sympathy
for her at all? Even though she’s so easily put upon, I’m surprised you don’t show her
a little consideration, if only for appearance’s sake. “Everyone helps to push over a
falling wall” they say; but don’t you think you carry it a bit too far?’
Shamed by her reproaches, the maids pushed open Er-jie’s door and went inside to
look. They found her dressed up in all her finery and stretched out dead upon the
kang. Their frightened screams brought Patience running in as well. She could not
help weeping out loud when she saw the cause. The other servants, too, when they
remembered how sweet and gentle Er-jie had been and how unfailingly kind to her
inferiors, were moved to tears by her death, but they were all so scared of Xi-feng
that they dared not let her see their tears.
Soon everyone in the household had heard the news. When Jia Lian arrived he clung
to the corpse and wept uncontrollably. Xi-feng made a show of weeping too and
hypo?critically reproached Er-jie for her ‘cruelty’.
‘Hard-hearted sister!’ she wailed. ‘How could you bear to leave me like this when
you knew how much I cared for you?’
You-shi and Jia Rong also came and wept a while, after which they urged Jia Lian to
cease his lamentations and begin to perform his duties. The first of these was to
report Er-jie’s death formally to Lady Wang and ask if he might lay out the body in
Pear-tree Court for five days and after that move it to the Temple of the Iron
Threshold. Lady Wang gave her permission, whereupon he at once sent servants to
open up Pear-tree Court and make the principal room in it ready to receive the
corpse.
Jia Lian did not like the idea of Er-jie’s leaving the mansion for the last time by way of
the rear gate and into the back streets beyond. He therefore opened up the gate in
the outer wall of Pear-tree Court giving on to the passage-way between the two
mansions which led into Two Dukes Street. Awnings were put up on either side of
this gate to accommodate sūtra-chanting monks.
A beautifully-embroidered satin pall was draped over a camp-bed and Er-jie’s body
laid on it and covered over with a sheet. On this it was carried by eight pages,
followed by a number of married womenservants, along the foot of the inside walls
and all the way to the room in Pear-tree Court which had been made ready for it. The
official geomancer had been summoned and was waiting there in readiness. He lifted
the coverlet back to look at Er-jie’s face. She looked almost alive - if anything even
more beautiful than in life. The sight provoked a fresh outburst of grief from Jia Lian.
Once more he clung to her and wept.
‘My poor wife!’ he sobbed. ‘You should never have died. I blame myself for
allowing this to happen.’
Jia Rong nervously urged restraint.
‘There, there, Uncle! Take it easy! She was unlucky, poor Auntie. That’s all you can
say about it.’
He pointed in the direction of the wall separating Pear-tree Court from the mansion.
Jia Lian, understanding his meaning, lowered his voice, though he continued to
reproach himself.
     ‘I was too careless. I should have noticed what was going on.’ He addressed
himself to the dead woman. ‘One of these days I shall get to the bottom of this and
you shall be revenged.’
At last the coverlet was replaced and the geomancer made his pronouncement.
‘I am assuming that she died at the end of the fifth watch. In that case you won’t
be able to take her out of here on the fifth day, I’m afraid. It will have to be either the
third or the seventh. For the encoffining, the best time would be four o’clock
tomorrow morning.’
‘The third day is much too soon,’ said Jia Lian. ‘It will have to be the seventh. I
couldn’t keep her here much longer than that, because my uncle and my cousin are
both away and I should need to have their permission; but I am planning to do much
more for her when we get her to the temple outside. I’d like to keep her there for the
full thirty-five days and give her a really decent funeral with a requiem and so forth at
the end of it. We can take her south to Nanking and bury her in the family graveyard
next year.’
      The geomancer agreed to all this, wrote out the burial licence, and took his
leave.
Various male kinsmen - Bao-yu was the first - came over to help Jia Lian mourn.
When they had gone, he went back to his own apartment to look for Xi-feng and ask
her for some money to buy timber for a coffin with and pay for the funeral.
Now Xi-feng had used her illness as a pretext for not accompanying the others to
Pear-tree Court. She claimed that she had received strict instructions from
Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang that until she had fully recovered she was to avoid
all places connected in any way with birth, sickness or death. She refused to go into
mourning for the same reason. The ban did not however prevent her from slipping
out into the Garden when everyone else had gone, making her way round it between
the rocks and the perimeter wall to the foot of the wall that separated it from
Pear-tree Court, and eavesdropping on what was going on inside. She could not hear
very much, but enough to send her scurrying back to Grandmother Jia to report on
what Jia Lian was up to. Grandmother Jia was indignant.
‘I never heard such nonsense! When a consumptive child dies, one just burns it and
scatters the ashes. Burying her in Nanking indeed! What can the man be thinking of?
If he feels he has to do something special for her because she was his wife, let him
observe the Thirty-Five Days. But after that he should either have her carried out and
burned or else buried in the common graveyard. Nanking, indeed!’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘That’s what I thought, but it wasn’t for me to say.’
Just then a maid arrived from Jia Lian, looking for her.
‘Mr Lian’s back, madam. He’s waiting for you to give him some money.’
Xi-feng went back to see him.
‘What’s this about wanting money?’ she asked him. ‘Don’t you know how difficult
things are lately? Every month now our allowance falls short of our expenditure. I
managed to raise three hundred taels yesterday to pay some of the bills with by
pawning two of my gold necklaces. There’s still twenty or thirty taels of that left that
you can have if you like.’
She told Patience to get it out and give it to him; then, muttering something about
Grandmother Jia having something more to say, she went away again, leaving Jia Lian
speechless with resentment. He was obliged to go through Er-jie’s drawers and
cupboards looking for the savings he had entrusted to her. But someone seemed to
have been through them before him, for all he could find were a few bits of broken
jewellery and a few far from new silk dresses. The sight of these clothes which she
had worn brought on another outburst of anguished weeping. He felt sure there was
something suspicious about her death but dared not utter what he thought. He made
the things up into a bundle and was appar?ently intending to take them outside and
sell them, for he had called no servant, and when Patience saw him was carrying the
bundle himself. She found the sight of him carrying it both pathetic but also a trifle
ludicrous. Hurriedly abstracting a packet containing two hundred taels of
miscellaneous bits and pieces of silver from one of Xi-feng’s chests, she drew him
into one of the side rooms where no one could see them and gave it to him.
‘Psst! Not a word! And by the way, if you want to cry, you can cry as much as you
like outside, but for goodness’ sake don’t make an exhibition of yourself here, where
everyone can see you!’
‘You are right,’ said Jia Lian, taking the money. He handed her a skirt out of the
bundle. ‘Here, take this. It’s something she often used to wear. Keep it to remember
her by.’
As he was insistent, she took it from him and put it away with her things.
Now that Jia Lian had some money, he sent someone to buy timber for the coffin.
Unfortunately the best planks turned out to be too expensive and the more modestly
priced ones did not meet with his approval. In the end he got on his horse and
insisted on going to see for himself. The outcome was that a set of planks costing five
hundred taels and obtained by him on credit were delivered from the
timber-merchant’s that evening. The carpenters were set to work on them
immediately and ordered to go on working through the night so that the coffin
should be ready in time.
He ordered some of the servants to dress in mourning and keep vigil at Er-jie’s side.
He himself did not return to his own apartment that evening, but spent that and
every other night of the seven at Pear-tree Court. Towards the end of this sojourn he
was somewhat surprised to receive a summons from Grandmother Jia.
The reason for the summons will be revealed in the chapter which follows.




CHAPTER 70

Lin Dai-yu resuscitates
the Poetry Club
And Shi Xiang-yun tries her hand
at a song lyric
Each of the seven nights following Er-jie’s death were spent by Jia Lian on his own in
Pear-tree Court. Throughout the whole of the seven-day period he had Buddhist
monks and Taoist priests chanting arid praying outside for her soul’s repose.
At the conclusion of the last chapter we mentioned the unexpected summons which
he received towards the end of this period from Grandmother Jia. It turned out to be
for the sole purpose of refusing him permission to convey Er-jie’s body to the family
temple outside the city. This was a heavy blow, but one to which he could not but
submit. He had to talk to the proprietor of the ground in which San-jie was buried
and have another grave opened for Er-jie above her sister’s. Apart from a few Jia
males and You-shi and her daughter-in-law, the only other mourners on the day they
buried her were Xi-feng’s kinsman Wang Xin and his wife. Xi-feng herself would have
nothing to do with the funeral and left Jia Lian to manage everything by himself.
The New Year was now approaching. Among the multitudinous duties that had now
to be attended to was the necessity of finding suitable wives from among the
maidservants for those of the menservants who had reached the marriageable age of
twenty-five. Xi-feng consulted Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang on this subject and a
lengthy discussion of it ensued. Several maids were of an age to marry, but for one
reason or another had to be exempted. The first of these was Faithful, who had taken
a vow to remain single all her life. Ever since the day on which she took this vow she
had refused even to speak to Bao-yu and had taken to using make-up only sparingly,
dispensing altogether with jewellery, and wearing only the very soberest clothes. The
others respected her determination and did not press her to abandon it. Amber had
to be exempted because she was ill. Sunset, too, since her break-up with Jia Huan,
had developed an illness that seemed incurable and had to be exempted for the
same reason. There remained only a few of the older maids-of-all-work from
Xi?feng’s and Li Wan’s apartments. The other maids were all too young. It was
decided to allow the young menservants to seek their brides outside.
*
Xi-feng’s illness, necessitating their standing in for her as household managers, had
for many months deprived Li Wan and Tan-chun of their leisure. That, and the
multifarious duties attendant on the New Year festival, had resulted in the indefinite
postponement of the Poetry Club. Now spring had come and at last there was time
for a meeting. But now it was Bao-yu’s condition that prevented them. Liu
Xiang-lian’s conversion and subsequent disappearance, San-jie’s suicide, Er-jie’s
hounding to death by Xi-feng, the grave deterioration in Fivey’s health caused by the
hardships of her night’s imprisonment - all these shocks and distresses following hard
upon one another had eventually reduced him to a state of mental collapse. He was
beginning to look and act like a half-wit and his speech was frequently disordered
and nonsensical. Aroma and the other maids were frightened out of their wits. They
dared not tell Grandmother Jia about it; instead they did what they could to distract
him by amusing him and making him laugh.
Early one morning he woke up to the sound of laughter, peals upon peals of it from
the neighbouring room. Aroma smiled at him when she saw that he was awake.
‘It’s Aventurin,’ she said, giving Parfumee the name that Bao-yu had insisted on.
‘You’d better go and rescue her. She’s got Skybright and Musk holding her down and
tickling her.’
Bao-yu slipped on his squirrel-lined gown and went into the outer room to look. The
three girls were on the kang, their bedding still not folded and none of them yet
dressed. Skybright, wearing only a tunic of leek-green Hangchow silk and a pair of red
silk drawers and with her hair hanging loose over her shoulders, knelt above
Parfumee’s body, straddling her as if riding a horse; Musk, wearing little but a red
breast-binder and an old gown that she had wrapped round herself like a cloak, was
tickling Parfumee under the armpits; Parfumee herself, in flower-patterned shirt, red
trousers and green stockings, lay on her back drumming her heels on the kang and
laughing so much that she seemed in some danger of asphyxiation.
‘Two big ones against one little one,’ said Bao-yu, laughing. ‘I shall have to see
about that!’
He got on the kang and began tickling Skybright. Skybright, being very ticklish, at
once began shrieking and let go of Parfumee in order to tickle him back, which gave
Parfumee the opportunity of getting on top of her and holding her down. Aroma
stood watching these antics with amusement.
‘Why don’t you get dressed, all of you?’ she said. ‘It won’t be so funny if you catch
cold.’
At that moment Casta came in.
‘Mrs Zhu thinks she left a handkerchief here last night. Have any of you seen it,
please?’
‘Yes,’ said Swallow. ‘I picked it up off the floor, but I didn’t know whose it was. I’ve
only just washed it and hung it out to dry. I’m afraid it won’t be dry yet.’
     Casta was greatly amused by the four figures struggling on the kang.
‘You’re certainly a lively lot here, larking about like this so early in the morning!’
     Bao-yu disengaged himself to talk.
     ‘Don’t you lot ever play, then? There are enough of you.’
     ‘Mrs Zhu isn’t much of a one for playing,’ said Casta, ‘and she keeps a pretty
tight rein on the others - Miss Qin and the two Miss Lis. It’s very quiet there now that
Miss Qin is sleeping over at Her Old Ladyship’s again. It will be quieter still next
winter when the two Miss Lis go back to their own home. Look how quiet it’s
become at Miss Bao’s place since Caltrop went back to Mr Pan. It’s as though several
people had left. Poor Miss Shi is quite lost without her!’
By coincidence it was Xiang-yun’s maid Kingfisher who walked in just at that moment.
She had a message for Bao-yu.
‘Miss Shi says come quickly, Master Bao. They’ve got a very good poem for you to
look at.’
‘Who have?’ said Bao-yu. ‘What sort of poem?’
‘The young ladies. They’re all together in the Drenched Blossoms Pavilion. You’ll
see when you get there.’
Bao-yu rushed through his toilet and hurried outside to join them. He found Dai-yu,
Bao-chai, Xiang-yun, Bao-qin and Tan-chun clustered round the sheet of paper on
which the poem was written.
‘Have you only just got up?’ the girls jeered when they saw him coming. ‘We’ve all
been up for hours!’
‘It’s more than a year now since our Poetry Club met,’ said one of them, ‘yet in all
that time no one seems to have felt the urge to get it going again. Springtime, when
everything in nature is renewing itself, seems an appropriate time for reestablishing
it.’
‘Yes,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘We founded it in the autumn, which is a time of decay.
Perhaps that’s why it didn’t thrive. If we reestablish it now, when everything is
burgeoning, it is bound to flourish! And this “Flower of the Peach” is such a splendid
poem: I think we ought to rename our club “The Peach-flower Club”. What do the
rest of you think?’
‘I think it’s an excellent idea,’ said Bao-yu. ‘May I see the poem?’
‘Let’s all go and see Farmer Sweetrice and discuss this business of reviving the
Poetry Club with her,’ said the others.
They got up in a body and began to go, Bao-yu reading the poem as he went.
The Flower of the Peach
Peach pink the tender flowers outside the window blow;
Peach pink on sleepy face the morning colours glow.
Tree-flowers outside the room and lady-flower inside:
Only a few short steps the flowery forms divide.
Slyly the conspiring wind tugs at the blind below:
Tree-flowers would peep inside if they could do so.
*
Outside the window tree-flowers are blooming still;
Inside the window lady-flower looks ill.
If the flowers could understand, surely they would grieve?
The anxious wind flaps the blind against the window-sill.
*
                   The anxious wind flaps the blind; spring crowns the courtyard trees;
Spring sights fill the lady’s eyes, but bring her heart no ease.
In her closed, untrodden court the moss grows green on the stones:
She leans there at the sunset hour, in the soft evening breeze.
*
In the soft breeze the lady’s face is wet with many a tear.
Her silken peach-skirt billows out, the peach-trees to be near.
The peach-flowers and the peach-leaves nod in a rich array:
The leaves, against the peach-pink, dark emerald appear.
A thousand trees, ten thousand trees, crowding close together,
Walls and buildings everywhere in a red mist smother.
*
Heaven’s new bed-spread is burning on the dawn loom of the skies:
It’s time now for sleeping lady-flower from dreams of spring to rise.
Her maid comes in with a golden bowl as she leaves her coral bed,
And the peach-pink stain from her sleepy face the chilly water dyes.

*
If with the water’s rosy hue comparison be made,
Carmine tears and dewy flowers seem of the self-same shade.
Yet lady’s tears and flowers in this unalike I find,
That the flowers are still and smiling, but the tears flow unallayed.
As she gazes on the smiling flowers, her tears at last grow dry;
But as they dry, the springtime ends and the flowers fade.
*
The flowers fade, and an equal blight the lady’s fair cheek palls.
The petals drift; she is weary; and soon the darkness falls.
A nightingale is singing a dirge for the death of spring,
And moonlight steals through the casement and dapples the silent walls.
Bao-yu uttered no word of praise when he had finished reading it, he simply went on
staring stupidly at the paper, He wanted to cry, but was ashamed that the girls should
see his tears and brushed them away with a hurried movement of his hand.
‘How did you get hold of this poem?’ he asked them.
‘First guess who wrote it,’ said Bao-qin mischievously.
‘River Queen,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Who else?’
‘Really?’ said Bao-qin. ‘Well, as a matter of fact, I did.’
‘I don’t believe you,’ said Bao-yu, smiling back at her. ‘The tone of voice is entirely
different from yours.’
‘That just shows how little you know about poetry,’ said Bao-qin. ‘Not all of Du Fu’s
poems have the complexity of “Autumn Thoughts”. He is equally capable of lines like
Rain-fattened plum-buds crimson splashed,
Or
The wind’s green duckweed-trails on the water bright.’
‘That’s as may be,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but I don’t believe Cousin Chai would allow you to
write such melancholy verses. And in any case, though I am sure you have the talent
to write verses like this if you wanted to, I don’t believe you would want to. Cousin
Lin writes like this because she has had actual ex?perience of grief.’
The girls all laughed.
They had now reached Sweet-rice Village. Li Wan was shown the poem and - it goes
without saying - was full of praise. After some discussion it was decided unanimously
that the first meeting of the revived Poetry Club should be held the very next day,
which as it happened, would be the second of the third month. The club was to be
renamed ‘The Peach-flower Club’ and Dai-yu was to be its presi?dent.
Next day, as soon as lunch was over, everyone met in the Naiad’s House and began
discussing the question of a subject. Dai-yu proposed that each of them should
compose a hundred couplets on ‘Peach-blossom’.
‘Don’t be ridiculous!’ said Bao-chai. ‘Even if we succeeded in writing so many, there
have been such a lot of poems written on this subject in the past that we should be
sure to find ourselves repeating what has been said before; and we couldn’t in any
case do anything to equal your “Flower of the Peach”. Think of something else.’
But just at that moment a servant came in from outside and summoned them away.
‘The elder Lady Wang is here. Will you all come over to pay her your respects,
please.’
So off they trooped to talk to Wang Zi-teng’s wife. They had to stay and have dinner
with her and after that show her over the garden. It was lighting-up time before she
went.
Next day was Tan-chun’s birthday. Yuan-chun had sent two little eunuchs well in
advance of the date with her presents (various ornaments for Tan-chun’s room).
There were presents from all the other members of the family as well, of course, but
we will spare the reader a list. After lunch Tan-chun had to change into her most
formal clothes and go around all the apartments making her kotows.
‘My poetry dub seems to have got off to rather a bad start,’ said Dai-yu ruefully. ‘I’d
forgotten about her birthday. Today and tomorrow will be completely taken up with
it. Even though there will be no formal birthday with players and so forth, we are
sure to have to spend all day in the front with Grandmother and Aunt Wang. There’s
sure not to be any time left for a meeting.’
She postponed the meeting until the fifth.
On the morning of the fifth, after lunch, while the girls stood talking with
Grandmother Jia, letters from Jia Zheng arrived. Bao-yu brought them with him when
he came to make his regular morning call. He opened the one addressed to his
grandmother and read it out to her. Most of it was taken up with greetings and
inquiries about her health, but there was also something about returning to the
capital some time in the sixth month. There were other letters in the same packet
dealing with personal or domestic matters which were opened and read by Jia Lian
and Lady Wang. Everyone was of course delighted to hear that he was coming back
so soon.
But once again the Poetry Club was fated to be unlucky. Not long before this date the
betrothal had been announced of Wang Zi-teng’s daughter to the Marquis of
Bao-ning’s son (the wedding to be in the fifth month) and Xi-feng had lately taken to
spending three or four days in a row at the Wang residence, helping her aunt with
the entertaining occasioned by this important event. As ill luck would have it, when
Wang Zi-teng’s lady called to collect Xi-feng on the fifth, she insisted that all her
other nephews and nieces should come too and spend the day ‘enjoying themselves’
at her place. Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang decreed that Bao-yu, Tan-chun, Dai-yu
and Bao-chai should go as a representative selection. It was out of the question to
object that they had better things to do; the four of them had to go back to their own
rooms and change into their most formal clothes before accompanying Wang Xi-feng
and their aunt to the Wang family residence. It was lighting-up time before they
returned.
As soon as he got back to Green Delights, Bao-yu threw himself down to rest. Aroma
seized the opportunity to offer him a little serious advice. He really must try and pull
himself together, she said, and apply himself whenever possible to his books, so as to
be ready for his father’s return. Bao-yu did some rapid calculations on his fingers.
‘It’s a bit early for that yet,’ he said.
‘It isn’t only the books,’ said Aroma. ‘Your calligraphy is even more important. Even
if you can get by on the books, what are you going to show him when he asks to see
your calligraphy?’
Bao-yu smiled unconcernedly.
‘I’m always doing calligraphy. There must be masses of it. Surely you keep it for me,
don’t you?’
‘Certainly we keep it for you,’ said Aroma. ‘I got it out to have a look at only
yesterday, while you were away. Five hundred and sixty sheets: for all the years since
you first started, that’s all you’ve got to show. If you ask me, I think that from
tomorrow onwards you ought to concentrate all your energies on copying. If you
could copy two or three sheets of calligraphy a day, then by the time he gets back,
even though you won’t be able to show him a sheet for every day, you should have
enough to get by with.’
Bao-yu heard her with some alarm. He had a look at the collected sheets himself. It
was true. There simply wasn’t enough there to convince anyone that he had been
practising calligraphy every day.
‘All right,’ he said. ‘Beginning from tomorrow, I’ll write a hundred characters every
morning.’
He was still discussing this when they went to bed.
Next morning, as soon as he had washed and combed his hair, he sat down at the
window and began painstakingly copying kai-shu, characters out of a sample-book.
Grandmother Jia thought he must be ill when he did not appear with the others for
his duty-call, and sent someone over to inquire. Bao-yu returned with the messenger
to wish her good morning and explain.
‘I’ve been practising calligraphy,’ he told her. ‘That’s what’s made me late.’
Grandmother Jia was delighted.
‘Keep it up, my boy! When you are studying or practising your calligraphy, it doesn’t
matter if you don’t come here at all. You may tell your mother I said so.’
Bao-yu went round to Lady Wang’s apartment to do so. His mother was
unimpressed.
‘It’s too late to begin sharpening your weapons on the field of battle,’ she said.
‘Getting in a panic now will do you no good. Even if you work all day and all night,
you won’t be able to make up for all the time you have wasted. More likely all you
will succeed in doing is making yourself ill.’
‘I’ll be all right,’ said Bao-yu.
Bao-chai and Tan-chun, who happened to be present, reassured her.
‘We can’t memorize his texts for him,’ they said, ‘but we could at least help him out
with his calligraphy. If each of us copied a sheet of characters for him every day to
add to what he has done himself, he ought to have enough calligraphy to get by with.
That’s one hurdle at least he’d be over. It would save Sir Zheng from getting angry
and Bao-yu from making himself ill.’
Lady Wang smiled and nodded.
When Dai-yu heard that Jia Zheng was coming home, she knew that he would be
sure to ask Bao-yu about his lessons and that anything which distracted him from
them would be merely adding to his troubles. Because of this she deliberately made
no more mention of the Poetry Club, and in order that he should not suspect her real
reason for dropping it, pretended that she was beginning to find the whole thing
rather a bore.
Tan-chun and Bao-chai each produced a sheet of characters a day to add to his
collection, and Bao-yu himself, by doubling the time he spent on calligraphy,
managed to produce two hundred or sometimes as much as three hundred
characters a day. By the end of the third month he had already added considerably to
his stock of sheets.
One day towards the end of the month he was going over this stock and had just
estimated that fifty or sixty more sheets would probably be enough, when
Nightingale arrived with a roll of something from Dai-yu. On opening it out he found
it to consist of several sheets, all of the same dark-yellow bamboo paper, covered
with tiny ‘fly’s-head’ kai-shu characters which she had copied, in a hand very similar
to his own, from sample-books of Zhong Yu’s and Wang Xi-zhi’s calligraphy. Bao-ya
was so pleased that he clasped his hands and made Nightingale a bow before
hurrying over to thank her mistress in person.
Shortly after that he received some more sheets of calligraphy that Xiang-yun and
Bao-qin had been copying for him. Now, when he put the whole lot together, he
found that, though there was nothing like a sheet a day for every day since he first
started, there was already a sufficient quantity to get by with. This was a great relief.
He could now forget about calligraphy for the time being and concentrate on revision.
His aim was to go three or four times over each of the texts.
While he was still busily engaged in this revision, a tidal wave hit a certain part of the
coast, causing damage and loss of life in a number of neighbouring communities.
After reading the reports sent in by the local authorities, the Emperor issued a
Rescript commanding Jia Zheng to visit the area on his way back in order to supervise
relief. It now seemed unlikely that he would be able to reach home before the end of
the seventh month. When he heard this, Bao-yu threw aside his books and reverted
to the drifting, aimless way of life that was customary with him.
Spring was now almost over. Xiang-yun, feeling rather bored, had been watching the
drifting willow-floss and amusing herself by composing a little poem about it. It was a
song-lyric, in the form of a Ru-meng-ling:
‘Not chewed-off ends of the sky’s embroidery?
‘What are they?’ - ‘Raise the blind a bit and see.’
A white hand snatches some and draws it in,
Pursued by the swallows’ chiding din.
Oh stay, oh stay!
The lovely spring drifts after you away.
Xiang-yun was rather pleased with her little poem and wrote it out on a slip of paper
to show Bao-chai. After that she went to look for Dai-yu and showed it to her. Dai-yu
read it and smiled.
‘It’s good. Both charming and original.’
‘We’ve never done song-lyrics at any of our poetry meetings,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Why
don’t you call a meeting for to?morrow and we’ll all do some? It would make a nice
change.’
Dai-yu was becoming infected by Xiang-yun’s enthusiasm.
‘It’s a good idea,’ she said. ‘I will.’
‘It’s a lovely day today,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Why not have the meeting today?’
‘I don’t see why not,’ said Dai-yu.
She told the servants to prepare some suitably dainty things to eat, while a couple of
them went off to summon the other cousins to the meeting. Meanwhile Dai-yu and
Xiang-yun agreed that ‘Willow Floss’ should be the subject of the poems and decided
on the stanza-patterns that they should conform to. All this was written down on a
sheet of paper which was pasted up on the wall. When the cousins arrived, they first
of all read the notice on the wall and then read Xiang-yun’s poem. Some little time
after that was devoted to praising it.
‘I’m not much good at song-lyrics,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but I suppose I had better do what
I can.’
Everyone drew lots then to see which stanza-forms they were to use. Bao-chai lit a
stick of Sweet Dreams incense, and then everyone settled down to think. Dai-yu was
the first to have something ready and write it down. Just as she had finished, Bao-qin
began hurriedly writing hers.
‘I’ve thought of mine,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but I’d like to look at yours first before I show
it to you.’
Tan-chun laughed.
‘Why does the incense seem to be burning so quickly today? I’ve only done the first
half of mine.’ She turned to Bao-?yu. ‘How about you? Have you done yours yet?’
Bao-yu had in fact written a few lines of one, but, feeling dissatisfied with what he
had written, had crossed it all out and begun again, by which time the incense had
almost burned itself out.
‘Bao-yu’s failed to make the grade as usual,’ said Li Wan, laughing. ‘But what about
Miss Plantain?’
Tan-chun promptly began to write down what she had composed. The others read
the words as she wrote them. It was the first half of a Nan-ge-zi lyric.
Once in the air you start,
    The creatures of the wind, the breezes’ sport,
Not to be bound or held back by any art,
To north and south and east and west
You drift apart.
‘Very good,’ said Li Wan. ‘But why don’t you finish it?’
Bao-yu had been willing to concede defeat. When he saw that the incense was
running out, he could see no point in writing an indifferent conclusion just for the
sake of finishing, and so he had laid down his brush and occupied himself instead in
reading what Tan-chun had written. As he did so, he had a sudden inspiration, and
picking up his brush again, quickly scribbled out a second half for it:
Your drifting fate not fear:
I understand the message that you bear.
    Though orioles mourn and the flowers’ end seems near,
Spring will return, but I must wait
Another year.
The girls were amused.
‘You’re a funny fellow. You can’t do your own, yet you can do someone else’s
without any trouble. It’s very good, but unfortunately it doesn’t count.’
They had a look at Dai-yu’s poem then. It was a Tang-duo-ling.
The pollen is spent in the Island of Flowers;
   From the House of the Swallow the perfume has fled.
    The fluff-balls dance,
Pursue, embrace,
Their floating lives, as our lives, quickly sped’
     That, craving Beauty,
Find it dead.

  The creatures of nature, they too know our sorrow,
Their beauty, like ours, must soon end in decay.
  Our fate, like theirs,
Uncertain hangs,
Wed to the wind, our bridegroom of a day,
  Who cares not if we
Go or stay.
The others admired it, but with reservation.
‘Pity it’s so gloomy,’ they said. ‘Still, there’s no denying, it is very good.’
Then they had a look at Bao-qin’s. She had written a Xi-jiang-yue:
In the Han palace gardens a scatter thin and slight,
But along the Sui embankment in legions falling:
Spring’s three-month handiwork before the wind in flight,
A day-dream of pear-blossom on a moonlit night.

In many a courtyard petals fall through the air,
 And the floss collects like fragrant snow on the casements:
 In North and South the same sight is seen now everywhere;
But for the sad exile most hard to bear.
‘A more virile type of melancholy,’ said the others, laughing. ‘Very typical! That “In
many a courtyard...” couplet is good.’
‘I don’t agree,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I think it suffers from the same pessimism as Cousin
Dai’s. Willow floss is a light and airy thing. It seems to me that the best way to avoid
the cliches that this subject invites is to give it a light and airy treatment. That is the
principle on which I have tried to compose my poem; but you may not think I have
succeeded.’
‘Don’t be so modest!’ said the others. ‘It’s sure to be good. Come on, hand it over!
Permit us to admire!’
It was a Lin-jiang-xian that she had written.
In mazy dances over the marble forecourt,
   Wind-whorled, into trim fluff-balls forming –
‘Bravo!’ said Xiang-yun. “‘Wind-whorled, into trim fluff-balls forming”: that line is
better than anything the rest of us have written.’
They read on.
Like fluttering moths or silent white bees swarming:
Not for us a tomb in the running waters,
Or the earth’s embalming.

      The filaments whence we are formed remain unchanging,
No matter what separates or unifies.
Do not, earth-child, our rootlessness despise:
   When the strong wind comes he will whirl us upwards
Into the skies.
They thumped the table enthusiastically.
      ‘Undoubtedly this poem is the best. There is a more haunting melancholy
perhaps in River Queen’s poem and more liveliness and charm in Cloud Maiden’s; but
all in all this is far and away the best poem. This time Little Xue and Plantain Lover fail
to make the grade. We shall have to think of a penalty.’
      ‘That’s fair enough,’ said Bao-qin, laughing, ‘but what about someone who
failed to submit anything at all? What should his penalty be?’
‘Don’t worry about him,’ said Li Wan. ‘He will be punished too – exemplarily!’
      Just at that moment there was a crashing noise outside the window which made
them jump. It sounded as if an outer casement had somehow come unfastened and
fallen into the bamboos. The maids ran outside to look. Other maids, who had been
waiting outside there all the time, told them what it was: a large kite shaped like a
butterfly which had fallen down and got caught in the tops of the bamboo.
‘What a beauty!’ said the maids from inside. ‘I wonder whose it is. They must have
cut the string. Let’s try and get it down.’
‘I recognize that kite,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It belongs to Uncle She’s new girl, Carmine.
Let’s take it down and give it back to her.’
‘There must be other kites like that besides hers,’ said Nightingale. ‘I think it’s silly
to say that it must be hers. Anyway, I don’t care. I’m going to get it down for us.’
‘How mean you are, Nightingale!’ said Tan-chun. ‘You’ve got a kite of your own
already. And if you keep someone else’s, aren’t you afraid of catching their bad luck?’
     ‘You’re right,’ said Dai-yu. ‘We don’t know whose bad luck it mightn’t be
bringing us. Take it away! Let’s take out our kite and get rid of our bad luck.’
Nightingale told the maids, who had by this rime succeeded in getting the kite down,
to take it to the women at the gate and hand it into their keeping. If anyone came
looking for it, they were to give it back to them. The other maids rushed off excitedly
to fetch Dai-yu’s kite. It was the kind called a ‘pretty lady’. While two of them carried
out the kite, one of them brought out a stool to stand on, another fastened the
cross-piece to the raising-stick, and another paid the string out from the winder.
Bao-chai stood with the other cousins at the gate of the courtyard, directing
operations. She told the girls to fly the kite in the open ground outside the courtyard.
‘This kite of yours isn’t nearly as pretty as Cousin Tan’s,’ Bao-qin told Dai-yu. ‘She
has one shaped like a phoenix, with wings that move.’
‘Why don’t you get yours and fly it then?’ Bao-chai said, turning to Tan-chun’s maid
Ebony.
    Ebony hurried off excitedly to do so. Bao-yu, catching the enthusiasm, sent a
maid off to fetch one of his own.
‘Bring the big fish one that Lai Da’s wife sent me yesterday,’ he told the girl.
After a long time gone, the girl came back empty-handed.
‘Skybright flew it yesterday and let it go.’
‘Really!’ said Bao-yu. ‘And I hadn’t even flown it once myself.’
Tan-chun laughed.
‘Never mind! At least she’s got rid of your bad luck for you!’
‘All right,’ said Bao-yu to the girl. ‘Go and fetch the big crab one.’
The girl went off and returned accompanied by two or three other maids carrying a
large pretty lady kite and a winder.
‘Miss Aroma says she gave the crab one to Master Huan yesterday. She says why
don’t you fly this one instead? It was sent to you yesterday by Mrs Lin.’
Bao-yu inspected it. The pretty lady was certainly a beauti?fully constructed creature.
He was secretly pleased and told the girls to fly it.
Tan-chun’s kite had also arrived by now and Ebony was already standing on a little hill
getting it up with the assistance of a few helpers. Bao-qin had sent for her kite, a
large red bat, and Bao-chai, beginning to share the excitement herself, had had hers
fetched too: it was a line of seven large geese flying one behind the other. Soon all
the kites but one were up in the air being flown successfully. Bao-yu’s pretty lady was
the exception. He said it was because the maids didn’t know how to do it properly
and insisted on flying it himself; but after a good deal of manoeuvring he could get
her no higher than the roof, and even then it was only to flop down weakly again
upon the ground. Bao-yu was getting into quite a state and the perspiration stood
out in beads upon his brow. The cousins all laughed. At this he became so
exasperated that he picked the kite up, threw it down on the ground again, and
pointed his finger at it in anger.
‘If you weren’t a lady, I’d stamp on you and smash you into pieces!’
Dai-yu laughed.
‘The string isn’t fastened on right. If you could get someone to refasten it for you
properly, it would fly just as well as any other.’
Dao-yu sent someone to take the kite back for restringing and fetch him another
pretty lady that he could fly in the mean time.
All the cousins were now standing with their faces turned upwards, watching the
kites as they soared higher and higher into the sky. A maid came round offering them
all sweets. Pre?sently there was a cry from Nightingale:
‘The wind’s getting stronger, Miss. Do you want to release it now?’
Dai-yu made her handkerchief into a pad for her hand and tested the tension on the
string. The wind was certainly pulling it with some force. She took over the winder
from Nightingale and let it run free, so that the kite could pull itself away in the wind.
There was a whirring noise as the last of the string ran out. Dai-yu asked the others if
any of them would like to cut it for her.
‘No, we’ve all got our own,’ they said. ‘You do yours first.’
   ‘It’s fun to see them fly away,’ said Dai-yu, ‘and yet it seems rather a pity.’
‘But that’s the main reason for flying kites,’ said Li Wan, ‘the pleasure of seeing
them fly away. Not to mention the fact that it is supposed to get rid of your bad luck.
You of all people ought to let yours go, so as to get rid of your illness.’
‘Come on, Miss, you’ve sent plenty of kites off in your time!’ said Nightingale. ‘Why
be so stingy all of a sudden? If you won’t cut it, I’ll cut it for you.’
She snatched a little pair of West Ocean silver scissors out of Snowgoose’s hand and
snipped through the kite-string, an inch or so from the winder.
‘Go away, kite!’ she cried merrily. ‘And take my mistress’s illness with you!’
The kite began to swoop and soar. Soon it appeared no bigger than an egg. A few
moments later and it was only a dot in the sky. Another moment and it had
disappeared from sight altogether.
‘Hurrah! Hurrah!’ cried the cousins, as they watched it disappear.
‘What a pity we don’t know where she will land!’ said Bao-?yu. ‘It would be nice if
she landed somewhere where there are people and some little child were to find her.
But suppose she lands in some uninhabited wilderness: how lonely she will be! I
think I shall send my lady after her, to keep her com?pany!’
He asked for the scissors and cut the string himself, and a second pretty lady went
hurrying after the first one until it, too, disappeared.
Tan-chun was just about to cut the string of her phoenix when another phoenix
appeared in the sky, not far from hers.
‘I wonder whose that is?’ said Tan-chun.
‘Don’t cut yours yet,’ the others cried. ‘It looks as if that one is going to get caught
up in it.’
And that is just what happened. The other phoenix drew nearer and nearer until the
two strings crossed and tangled. The maids were all for winding Tan-chun’s kite in
and capturing the other kite with it, but the owner of the other kite was not
prepared to yield, and after a good deal of tugging and heaving on both sides, the
strings finally snapped and the two phoenixes flew off companionably together. The
cousins clapped their hands delightedly.
‘Well, I’ve released my kite and now I’m tired. I think I shall go in and rest,’ said
Dai-yu.
‘Just wait until we’ve released ours,’ said Bao-chai, ‘and then we can all go.’
So she and Xiang-yun and Bao-qin each cut their kite-strings and watched their kites
fly away, after which all of cousins went back to their own apartments.
*
In spite of the reprieve, Bao-yu dared not abandon his lessons altogether and
continued to do a little revision or calligraphy from time to time. When he was
feeling bored, he would go out to seek the company of the girls, or go round to the
Naiad’s House for a chat. The girls, for their part, knowing how much he was behind
with his work, no longer sent anyone to invite him when they met together for
poetry-reading or other diversions; and Dai-yu, in her anxiety lest he should once
more incur his father’s wrath, frequently feigned sleep when he went round to see
her, so as not to be the cause of keeping him from his studies. Bao-yu was reduced to
spending more and more time in his own room, where work itself now often took the
place of a diversion.
     In this manner the summer gradually wore away. Autumn was just beginning
when one day two of his grandmother’s maids came round in a very agitated state to
summon him.
     The purpose of the summons and the reason for their agitation will be explained
in the chapter which follows.




CHAPTER 71

Lady Xing deliberately humiliates her
Daughter-in-law
And Faithful inadvertently interrupts
a pair of love-birds



It was the news of Jia Zheng’s imminent homecoming that had caused the
maidservants’ agitation. As an Education Officer, Jia Zheng was supposed to report on
his commission as soon as he arrived and, being a very conscientious man, he would
have thought it improper even to look in on his family before doing so. When,
therefore, at the news of his coming, Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian and Bao-yu went out to
the first poststage beyond the walls to welcome him, he merely inquired after his
mother’s health, bowing respectfully in her direction as he did so, and told them to
go back and wait for him at home. After his interview next day with the All-highest,
his mission was formally completed and he could return with a good conscience to
his family. The All-highest had been graciously pleased to grant him a whole month’s
leave of absence in which to rest and recuperate at home.
      Jia Zheng was beginning to age now, and the worries and responsibilities of
office had taken their toll of his health. It was good to be back after so long an
absence from those nearest and dearest to him; he was determined to relax and
enjoy himself to the utmost, refused even to think about money matters or domestic
responsibilities, and spent all his time reading, or, when he felt in need of company,
drinking and playing Go with his literary gentlemen, or enjoying the de?lights of
family life with his wife and mother in the women’s apartments inside.
     This year the third day of the eighth month was Grandmother Jia’s eightieth
birthday. A formidable number of people would have to be invited and there was
even some doubt whether they would be able to accommodate them all.
After discussion by the menfolk of both mansions, it was decided that there should
be eight days of entertaining, beginning on the twenty-eighth of the seventh month
and ending on the fifth day of the eighth on each of these days banquets would be
given in both mansions: in the Ning-guo mansion for male guests and in the
Rong-guo mansion for female ones. The Painted Chamber, Prospect Hall and one or
two other of the larger buildings in Prospect Garden would be used as rest?rooms for
the ladies. The programme of entertaining would be as follows: the twenty-eighth
would be for Imperial kinsmen, Princes and Princesses of the Blood and their
consorts, Royal Highnesses, Serene Highnesses and members of the high nobility; the
twenty-ninth would be for Ministers of State and Civil and Military Governors and
their wives; the thirtieth for official colleagues and their wives and members of other
clans related to the Jia family by marriage; on the first of the eighth month a family
party would be given by Jia She, on the second one by Jia Zheng and on the third one
by Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian; on the fourth a joint entertainment would be given by all
members of the Jia clan irrespective of age and seniority; and on the fifth there
would be another joint enter?tainment organized by Lai Da, Lin Zhi-xiao and the
other senior domestics.
Ever since the beginning of the seventh month presents had been coming in almost
continuously. From the highest source of all an order was received by the Board of
Rites                                                   authorizing the bestowal of the
following:
a ru-yi sceptre of gold and jade four lengths of tribute satin
four gold and jade cups
five hundred taels of silver from the Imperial Treasury
Yuan-chun’s gifts, which were delivered to the mansion by eunuchs, were:
a golden figurine of Old Longevity
a staff of aloeswood
a rosary of putchuk beads
a box of Fu Shou incense
a pair of golden medallions
four pairs of silver ingots
twelve lengths of tribute satin
four jade cups
And there were presents too numerous to mention from princes and princesses and
from the families of a host of civil and military officials both great and small who
were on visiting terms with the Jias. Several long tables were carried into the main
reception hall and covered with red baize and the choicest presents set out on them
every day for Grandmother Jia’s inspection. She went along for the first day or two
and took some pleasure in examining her gifts, but soon grew tired of this and told
Xi-feng to look after them for her: she would look at them herself some other day,
when she had nothing better to do.
      By the twenty-eighth both mansions had been hung with lanterns and
festooned all over with garlands. Painted phoenixes gambolled on folding screens,
embroidered lotuses blossomed on drapes and covers, and the sound of fluting and
piping could be heard several streets away. The only guests that day at the Ning-guo
mansion were the Prince of Bei-jing, the Prince of Nan-an, Princess Yang-chang’s
Consort, the Prince of Luo-shan and a number of noblemen whose families had long
been on friendly terms with the Jias. At the Rong-guo mansion the guests were the
Dowager Princess of Nan-an, the Prince of Bei-jing’s Consort, and the ladies of the
various aforementioned noblemen. Grandmother Jia and the others were dressed in
full court rig to receive them. After the initial salutations were over, the visitors were
conducted to Prospect Hall inside the Garden, where they took tea and ‘changed
their clothes’. From there they were conducted to the Hall of Exalted Felicity, where
they offered formal con?gratulations to Grandmother Jia before finally, after much
polite bowing and deferring, taking their places at the banquet. The Dowager
Princess of Nan-an and the Prince of Bei?jing’s Consort sat at the two central tables
at the back of the hall; the two rows of tables arranged at right-angles to left and
right of theirs were occupied in order of precedence, the Marchioness of Jin-xiang
and the Countess of Lin-an heading the row upon the left, while Grandmother Jia, as
hostess, occupied the first of the right-hand ones. Lady Xing and Lady Wang stood in
attendance behind Grandmother Jia’s chair, with You-shi, Xi-feng and a number of
other Jia ladies fanning out to left and right behind them. Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife and Lai
Da’s wife stood by the bamboo curtain on one side of the hall supervising the
transportation of dishes and wine-kettles by a small army of serving-women, while
Zhou-Rui’s wife directed the waitresses from the other side of the folding screens.
Meanwhile the attendants brought with them by the lady visitors were being
entertained elsewhere.
     Outside, on the temporary stage that had been erected in the courtyard, the
players were due to begin their performance. In honour of the occasion they began
by kneeling in a row at the front of it and offering their birthday congratulations to
the old lady, while twelve little maids, dressed up as page-boys in identical costumes,
stood solemnly to attention below the stage. When the players had finished, one of
these little girl-pages advanced to the foot of the steps leading up to the hall with a
playbill in her hands. She was relieved of it by a serving-woman who had been
stationed there for the sole purpose of receiving and carrying messages. This woman
handed it to Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, who put it on a salver, edged herself through the
bamboo curtain, and carried it to Cousin Zhen’s concubine, Lovey. Lovey handed it to
You-shi, and You-shi walked up and offered it to the Dowager Princess of Nan-an. The
Dowager Princess, after first, for politeness’ sake, de?clining, chose one of those
congratulatory pieces which are customarily performed on these occasions. The
Prince of Bei-jing’s Consort, whose turn it was next, did exactly the same. The rest of
the ladies insisted that the players themselves should put on whatever they thought
best, for it was sure to be good.
     After four courses of various dishes and one of soup, the visitors’ attendants
gave their mistresses’ largesse to the players, and the ladies returned to the Garden
to ‘change their clothes’ and sample a very special tea. The Dowager Princess of
Nan-an asked Grandmother Jia about Bao-yu.
     ‘Several temples are reading the Immaculate Diamond for me today,’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘He has gone to kneel a while in each one of them while they do
the reading.’
‘And what about your granddaughters?’ said the Princess.
‘Oh, this one is ill and that one is weakly and the other is too shy to see anyone.
They are looking after my room for me today. We have more players than we need,
so I thought we might as well let them have a troupe to themselves. I expect they are
at this moment sitting with their cousins and watching a play in my courtyard.’
      ‘Do send for them!’ said the old princess coaxingly.
      Grandmother turned to where Xi-feng was standing behind her.
      ‘Go and fetch your Cousin Shi and the two Xue girls and your Cousin Lin, will you?
Oh, and you can bring your Cousin Tan with you as well.’
      Xi-feng went to Grandmother Jia’s place. All the girls were there, nibbling sweets
and watching a play, as Grandmother Jia had said they would be. Bao-yu had just got
back from his kneeling. In obedience to her message, Bao-chai, Bao-qin, Dai-yu,
Tan-chun and Xiang-yun followed her back into the Garden and made their curtseys
to the assembled ladies. Some of the guests had seen them before, some had not;
but all alike exclaimed admiringly at their beauty. Of the five girls Xiang?yun was the
most familiar to those present.
      ‘Naughty girl!’ said the Dowager Princess waggishly. ‘You should have come
yourself to see me when you heard that I was here, not waited to be called! I shall
have a bone to pick with your uncle now, next time I see him!’
      She took Tan-chun by one hand and Bao-chai by the other and drew them
towards her.
      ‘And how old are you girls?’ she asked.
      She released them, after several times commenting what ‘fine girls’ they were,
and then subjected Dai-yu and Bao?-qin to the same treatment, taking them by the
hand, scrutiniz?ing each of them in turn, and extravagantly praising their good looks.
      ‘Dear me, they are all such lovely girls!’ she said laughing. ‘I really don’t know
which of them I prefer.’
      Suitable presents had now been made ready by an attendant: five gold rings,
five jade rings and five wristlets of aromatic beads.
‘Rather trifling presents I am afraid, my dears,’ said the Dowager Princess. ‘Perhaps
you could give them to your maids.’
     The five girls kotowed their thanks. There were more presents from the Prince
of Bei-jing’s Consort and from the other ladies present - but there is no need to
enumerate them.
     When they had finished their tea, the ladies walked for a while in the Garden,
after which Grandmother Jia invited them to return to the banquet; but the Dowager
Princess of Nan-an took her leave. ‘To tell you the truth, I am not feeling very well
today,’ she said. ‘I would not have stayed away for the world, but I am sure you will
understand if I leave a little early.’
     Under the circumstances, Grandmother Jia could not very well press her to stay,
and after some polite skirmishing when the Princess protested that she could
perfectly well find her way off the premises alone, the entire company saw her to the
gate of the Garden, where she climbed into her palanquin and was carried away. The
Prince of Bei-jing’s Consort returned with the rest of them to the Hall of Exalted
Felicity and sat with them there for some minutes, but then she too took her leave.
Of the other ladies some stayed on to the end, others left when a decent interval had
elapsed after the departure of the two princesses.
      The day’s entertaining left Grandmother Jia exhausted and next day she was
unable to see anyone and stayed in her own room. Lady Xing and Lady Wang had to
receive the female guests on her behalf. As for the male ones, those of them who
wanted to offer their birthday congratulations had to do so in the outer reception
hall. Their salutations were returned, obeisance for obeisance and bow for bow, by
Jia She, Jia Zheng and Cousin Zhen, who then conducted them to the banquet
prepared for them in Ning-guo House. But that is enough of banquets.
*
       As long as the birthday celebrations continued, You-shi did not go back to the
Ning-guo mansion to sleep. During the daytime she helped the others to entertain
the guests. In the evenings, after some time spent in Grandmother Jia’s apartment
chatting with the old lady, she would help Xi-feng supervise the getting out and
putting away of the porcelain, gold and silver ware and other things that had been
used that day or would be on the next, and the going over and setting out on display
of the most recently-arrived batch of presents. After that she would go to Li Wan’s
place to spend the night.
       On one of these evenings she had just finished waiting on Grandmother Jia
while she took her evening meal, when the old lady exempted her from further
services.
       ‘You must be tired,’ she said. ‘I know I am. Why don’t you go and have a bite to
eat yourself now and then go to bed? You will have to be up early again tomorrow.’
       You-shi thanked her and went off to Xi-feng’s room hoping for some supper.
Xi-feng was in the upstairs storage-room, however, supervising the putting away of
some screens that had just arrived. Only Patience was at home, folding up some of
Xi-feng’s clothes. Remembering Patience’s many kindnesses to Er-jie while she was
still alive, You-shi nodded her head sympathetically.
       ‘You are a good-hearted girl, Patience. I am afraid you have a great deal to put
up with.’
       Patience’s eyes reddened, but she forbore to say anything. You-shi asked her if
Xi-feng had eaten yet. Patience smiled.
       ‘She wouldn’t eat without first asking you,’ she said.
     ‘In that case I’ll go and look for a bite elsewhere,’ said You?-shi. ‘I don’t know
why, but I’m absolutely ravenous.’
     ‘Don’t go!’ said Patience. ‘We’ve got some mince rolls. Why not make do with
one or two of those now and have supper with Mrs Lian when she gets back?’
     ‘No, I can see you’re busy,’ said You-shi. ‘I think I shall go into the Garden to see
the girls.’
     Since she obviously wanted to go, Patience made no further effort to detain her.
     When You-shi came to the Garden she found the main gate and all the side
gates still open and blazing with lights. Turning to the maid who accompanied her,
she told her to go and fetch one of the women who were supposed to be on duty.
The maid went into the duty room in the gatehouse, but not a soul was anywhere to
be seen. She came back and told You?-shi. Very well, said You-shi, then she should go
and fetch one of the stewardesses from the mansion. The maid went back into the
mansion to the corner-house inside the inner gate which was used by the
stewardesses as a meeting-place, but its only occupants on this occasion were two
women busily engaged in sharing out some left-overs for their supper.
‘Where are the stewardesses, then?’ the girl asked them. ‘My mistress from the
Ning-guo is waiting for someone to give an order to.’
The women continued with their sharing-out. They felt little inclined to put
themselves out for a visitor from the other mansion.
‘The stewardesses have all gone home,’ said one of them.
‘In that case you’d better go and get one from her lodgings,’ said the maid.
‘Our job is to look after the rooms here, not to run errands,’ said the woman. ‘If you
want someone fetched, you’d better go and find someone whose job it is to fetch
them.’
‘But this is rank mutiny!’ said the maid. ‘Not your job to run errands? You might
fool a newcomer with such talk, but you don’t fool me! If I’d asked you to go to one
of the stewardesses with a private message or tell her to come and collect a tip,
you’d be trotting off like a little puppy-dog to its master. There’d be no talk then
about it not being your job to do errands. I’d like to hear you give Mrs Lian such an
answer!’
Partly because they had had a drop to drink and partly because what the girl said was
uncomfortably close to the truth, the women’s resentment quickly flared into anger.
     ‘Impertinent little baggage! We know very well what our job is; we don’t need
you to tell us. And before you start criticizing us, you might take a look at your own
parents. The way they suck up to the stewards and stewardesses at your place is
downright disgusting. You keep to your mansion and we’ll keep to ours. Go and make
trouble for your own people if you have a mind to, but keep away from us!’
     The maid had become white-faced with anger.
     ‘Good!’ she said ‘Very good!’ and turning about, walked straight back into the
Garden to report all this to her mistress.
     On entering the Garden some minutes previously, You-shi had come upon
Aroma, Bao-qin and Xiang-yun laughing at a story that two nuns from the Convent of
the Saviour King were telling them. When You-shi told them how hungry she was,
they invited her to sit with them in the courtyard of Green Delights while Aroma
went indoors to get her something to eat. Aroma found some rolls with meat and
some with vege?table stuffing in them and put them in a food-box to carry out to her.
She also brought out some tea for Bao-qin and Xiang-?yun to sip while You-shi was
eating the rolls. The nuns con?tinued with their story. At that moment the maid
arrived, still bursting with indignation, and proceeded to tell You-shi about her
encounter and what the two women had said. You-shi was silent for some moments
before she made any comment.
     ‘What extraordinary behaviour!’ she said finally.
     One of the nuns gave the maidservant a prod.
     ‘You are too quick-tempered, my child! You don’t want to go repeating what
those silly old women said to you. Your mistress is quite worn out from all her
exertions during these past few days. What she needs is a little pick-me-up,
something to cheer her up a bit. That’s what we’re trying to do, cheer her up. This is
no time to come troubling her with that sort of talk!’
     Aroma took the girl by the hand.
     ‘Go off and calm down a bit, there’s a good girl! I’ll get someone to fetch one of
the stewardesses.’
     ‘It isn’t necessary,’ said You-shi. She addressed herself to the maid. ‘Go and fetch
those two women, and when you’ve done that, you can find out where Mrs Lian is
and tell her I want to see her.’
     ‘I’ll go,’ said Aroma.
     ‘I’d rather you didn’t,’ said You-shi.
     The two nuns rose to their feet with propitiatory smiles.
     ‘Come, Mrs Zhen! You are such a kind, forgiving person as a rule. Surely you are
not going to lose your temper on Her Old Ladyship’s birthday? Whatever would
people say?’
Bao-qin and Xiang-yun added their own smiling entreaties.
‘All right,’ said You-shi, ‘I’ll let them off - but only because it is Lady Jia’s birthday.’
Unfortunately Aroma had in the meantime already sent a junior maid outside the
Garden to look for someone, and this girl was already pouring an account of what
had happened into the receptive ear of Zhou Rui’s wife, who, as it happened, was the
first person she ran into.
      Although Zhou Rui’s wife was not actually a stewardess, she regarded herself as
being of equal dignity with one on account of her special relationship with Lady
Wang, who had brought her from the Wang household when she was married;
moreover she was a somewhat insinuating woman, whose eagerness to please made
her a popular servant with the younger mistresses. What the maid told her brought
her flying over at once to Green Delights, brimming over with sympathy and concern.
      ‘How shocking! Poor Mrs Zhen! No wonder she is so angry! I wish I had been
there. I should have boxed their ears for them on the spot and settled accounts with
them later!’
      These worthy sentiments were uttered by her on the way. You-shi was pleased
to see her when she arrived.
      ‘Ah, my dear Zhou! Perhaps you will tell me whether or not I was right to feel
concerned. When I came into the Garden just now, all the gates were wide open and
candles were still burning in all the lanterns. Anyone would have been free to go in or
come out as they pleased. I thought how awful it would be if anything were to
happen, but when I gave orders for the duty-women to close the gates and put the
lights out, not a single one was to be found.’
      ‘Good gracious!’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘Mrs Lian gave special orders about this
only a few days ago and already they’re disobeying them! She’ll have to flog a few of
them when this is over; that’s the only way to cure this sort of thing.’
      You-shi then told her what the two women had said to her maid.
      ‘Well, don’t let it upset you, Mrs zhen,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘Just wait until these
celebrations are over: I’ll have a word with the stewardesses and we’ll take that
precious pair and flog the daylights out of them. “You keep to your mansion and we’ll
keep to ours” indeed! They’ll be singing a different tune from that by the time we’ve
finished with them!’
      In the midst of this excitement someone arrived from Xi?feng’s, inviting You-shi
to come back for some supper.
      ‘I’m not hungry,’ said You-shi. ‘I’ve just been eating some rolls. Tell your mistress
to have her supper without me.’
      Zhou Rui’s wife went round herself to Xi-feng’s place shortly afterwards to
repeat all this story to Xi-feng.
      ‘All you need do is make a note of the women’s names,’ Xi-feng told her. ‘When
these celebrations are over, you can have them tied up and sent over to Mrs Zhen to
punish or pardon as she sees fit. It isn’t a very serious matter.’
      Now as it happened, Zhou Rui’s wife was on very bad terms with these two
women, and in her impatience to proceed against them, she put a somewhat loose
construction on the warrant given her by Xi-feng, for she first of all sent a boy round
to Lin Zhi-xiao’s house to say that Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife was wanted by You-shi
immediately, and then sent some other servants to apprehend the two women, tie
them up, and hand them over to the grooms to be shut up in the stables and kept
under guard there until further notice.
     Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, when she got the message, at once got into her carriage,
wondering what on earth could be the matter, and hurried over to Xi-feng’s place to
inquire; but when, on reaching the inner gate, she sent someone inside to announce
her, a maid came out and told her that Xi-feng had already gone to bed.
     ‘It’s Mrs Zhen that wants to see you,’ said the girl. ‘She’s in the Garden now.
You’d better look for her there.’
     Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife went into the Garden and hurried through it to Sweet-rice
Village. You-shi was quite put out when the maids announced her arrival. She had
her invited in immediately and smiled at her apologetically as she entered.
      ‘I only asked for you because I wanted to give an order and nobody could be
found. It wasn’t anything serious. It certainly wasn’t serious enough to call you out
for specially. It is all over and done with now, in any case.’
      Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife smiled, a trifle grimly.
      ‘But madam, Mrs Lian sent someone round to my place to say that you were
asking for me.’
      ‘If I was, it was under the impression that you were still here,’ said You-shi. ‘I
suppose it must be Zhou’s wife who told Mrs Lian about this. She need not have done
so. It was really nothing of any consequence. Please go back home to bed.’
      Li Wan was on the point of telling Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife what the trouble was, but
You-shi would not let her. Since evidently neither lady was going to tell her, Lin
Zhi-xiao’s wife took her leave. Just as she was coming out of the Garden gate, she ran
into Aunt Zhao.
      ‘Good gracious me! Still on your feet at this hour, Mrs Lin?’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘I’d
have thought you’d be at home and tucked up in bed by now!’
      ‘I was at home,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, and proceeded to tell Aunt Zhao why she
had been called out (for she had privately found out the reason for the summons
before going into the Garden).
      ‘Well, fancy calling you out for a piddling little thing like that!’ said Aunt Zhao
indignantly. ‘She should either have ignored it altogether, if she was feeling generous,
or if she was in an unforgiving mood, had the women given a few whacks and that
would have been the end of the matter. There was no need to drag you out specially.
I won’t ask you in for a cup of tea now, you’ll probably be wanting to get back to bed.’
      Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife continued on her way to the side gate where her carriage was
waiting. The young daughters of the two imprisoned women were lying in wait for
her there and, when they saw her coming, tearfully entreated her to intercede for
their mothers. Liin Zhi-xiao’s wife merely laughed at them.
     ‘Silly children! Those mothers of yours ought not to drink so much or be so free
with their tongues - that’s the cause of all this trouble. I don’t know what makes
them do it. It’s Mrs Lian who had them tied up and I’m in trouble myself now, so I
don’t know what I can do to help them.’
     The two daughters, being only little girls and of very limited understanding,
continued to blubber and entreat and clung so obstinately to Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife that
she was unable to get into her carriage. She rounded on one of the two girls
exasperatedly.
     ‘Stupid creature!’ she said. ‘What do you want to come hanging around me for
when you could find help elsewhere? Wasn’t your elder sister married to Mrs Fei’s
boy recently? Mrs Fei came here with Lady Xing when she was married. If you were
to tell your sister about this and get her to have a word with Mrs Fei and Mrs Fei
spoke about it to Lady Xing, that would be the end of the matter.’
      Glad to be reminded, the girl went scampering off immediately; but the other
girl continued to entreat. Lin Zhi?xiao’s wife shoved her off impatiently.
      ‘You really are a stupid child! Didn’t I just say that if she has a word with her
sister that will be the end of the matter? That means they’ll both be let off. You
surely don’t think they’d let her mother off and give yours a beating?’
      She got into her carriage then and drove back home.
The first little girl went and told her sister, as Lin Zhi?-xiao’s wife had told her to, and
the sister at once repeated the story to her mother-in-law, Goody Fei. This Goody Fei
was a notorious trouble-maker, whose first reaction to the story was a stream of
invective, fully audible to the occupants of all the neighbouring courtyards, after
which she went to solicit help from Lady Xing.
      ‘It’s my boy’s mother-in-law, my lady: she only had a few words with a maid of
Mrs Zhen’s, but that Zhou woman told such a pack of lies about her to Mrs Lian that
she had my boy’s mother-in-law and the woman that was with her tied up and shut
in the stables and in a few days’ time she’s going to have them both beaten. Do,
please, my lady, put in a good word with Mrs Lian and ask her to let them off.’
      Ever since the Faithful fiasco Grandmother Jia’s attitude towards Lady Xing
seemed to have hardened, whilst Xi-feng’s stature seemed to have grown at her
mother-in-law’s expense. The jealousy and resentment that Lady Xing felt as a
conse?quence of this had recently been exacerbated by an imagined slight: the
passing over of Ying-chun when the Dowager Princess of Nan-an asked to see the Jia
girls and Tan-chun was the only one of the three to be called. Mischief-makers were
not wanting to play upon her resentment, in this case repre?senting Xi-feng’s action
as a deliberate attack on her authority.
      Her hatred of Xi-feng had now reached a degree of intensity that went beyond
all reason.
      Early next morning she went to pay her respects to Grandmother Jia. This was
the junior clansmen’s day. When Lady Xing got there, the junior clansmen had
already arrived and the players were waiting to begin. Grandmother Jia always
enjoyed meeting young people, and so today she was appear?ing in person to
receive their congratulations, dressed in her ordinary clothes, since this was a family
party and the guests were all her juniors. She was reclining in the middle of the rear
part of the hall on a large wooden couch furnished with a back-rest and bolsters and
a footstool in front of it in case she should wish to sit upright. Around her couch were
ranged a number of identical stools on which Bao-chai, Bao-qin, Dai-Yu, Xiang-yun,
Ying-chun, Tan-chun and Xi-chun were sitting. Of the twenty or so girls of their
generation whose mothers had brought them there on this occasion two, Jia Bin’s
sister Xi-luan and Jia Qiong’s sister Si-jie, had, on account of their good looks,
well-spokenness and charming manners, found particular favour with Grandmother
Jia and been invited to sit on stools with the other seven. Bao-yu sat up on the couch
with his grandmother and massaged her legs for her. Aunt Xue had been given the
place of honour in the ordering of the feast and the two lines of tables which rayed
out on either side were occupied by the other ladies according to their husbands’
seniority in the clan. The men sat on the verandah at either side of the hall, also in
order of seniority.
      Presently the birthday ceremony began. The female members of the clan were
the first to make their kotows. The males would have come next, but Grandmother
Jia lay back on the couch and sent someone outside to excuse them. Then Lai Da
arrived with the male domestics. They knelt down, row upon row of them, from the
ornamental gate all the way up to the steps at the foot of the hall, to make their
kotows. After them it was the turn of the married women, and after them of the
maids. Something like the time it would take to eat two or three meals must have
elapsed before all the kotowing was over. Next a number of bird-cages were set
down in the middle of the courtyard and the birds released from them. Then Jia She
and the other seniors supervised the burning of paper offerings to Heaven-and-Earth
and Old Longevity. Only then did the drinking and the play-acting begin.
      Grandmother Jia remained until the players’ mid-day interval before retiring to
rest in her own room. She insisted that those of them who had escorted her there
should go back and enjoy themselves, and asked Xi-feng to arrange for Xi-luan and
Si-jie to stay on for a couple of nights after the party.
     Xi-feng went off to speak to the girls’ mothers. Both had received favours from
her in the past and were only too happy to comply with anything she asked them,
and the girls themselves were of course delighted at the prospect of playing in the
Garden all day and not having to go home for the night.
     Lady Xing bided her time until the evening; then, just as everyone was getting
ready to go, she went up to Xi-feng in front of all the others and made her a request.
     ‘I understand that you became angry with two old women last night and sent
Zhou Rui’s wife to have them tied up. I don’t know what crime they had committed
and it isn’t of course my business to interfere, but it does seem to me that Lady Jia’s
birthday is an occasion when we should all be doing our utmost to help those less
fortunate than ourselves - giving money and free rice to the old and needy and that
sort of thing - hardly a time for maltreating aged domestics. Could you not see your
way to releasing them, for Lady Jia’s sake, if not for mine?’
Having said that, she got into her carriage and drove away.
The humiliation of being addressed like this in front of so many people filled Xi-feng
with anger and confusion. Her face turned a dusky red colour and for some moments
she was so taken aback that she was unable to speak; then, turning to Lai Da’s wife,
she said, with a forced laugh:
      ‘But this is ridiculous! Last night I heard that some of our people had been rude
to Mrs Zhen, and as I was afraid that she might be feeling vexed about it, I naturally
had them tied up so that they could be placed at her disposal. It wasn’t me they had
offended. I wonder what tale-bearing busybody is res?ponsible for carrying this story
next door?’
      ‘What exactly happened last night?’ asked Lady Wang.
      Xi-feng explained.
      ‘I didn’t even know about this myself,’ said You-shi, laughing. ‘Really, Feng, I
think you were a trifle officious.’
      ‘I was concerned about you,’ said Xi-feng. ‘You had been insulted. It was a
natural courtesy to place them at your disposal. Suppose I was at your place and
some of your people insulted me? Wouldn’t you send them over to me for me to
deal with? I thought that was a general principle which all of us observed, even if the
servant in question was a highly valued one. Some meddlesome person has blown
this incident up out of all proportion for the sake of stirring things up next door. I
shouldn’t have thought myself that it was worth mentioning even.’
      ‘Your mother-in-law was quite right,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Cousin Zhen’s wife is one
of us. There was no need for such empty courtesies in her case. Grandmother’s
birthday is much more important. The women ought to be released.’
      Xi-feng’s humiliation was now complete. A feeling of such wretchedness came
over her that she could no longer hold back the tears of anger that had been
collecting in her eyes. Not wishing them to be seen, she rushed back to her own
apartment to weep alone.
     She had hardly got back, though, when Grandmother Jia sent Amber round to
summon her. Amber noticed with surprise that she had been crying.
     ‘Hullo, what’s all this about? She’s waiting to ask you about something.’
     Xi-feng wiped away her tears, washed and dried her face, and put on a fresh lot
of make-up before accompanying Amber back to Grandmother Jia’s apartment.
     ‘How many of the people who sent presents gave me screens ?’ the old lady
asked Xi-feng when she arrived.
     ‘Sixteen,’ said Xi-feng. ‘There were twelve big screens and four little kang
screens. The biggest screen was from the Zhens of Nanking: a twelve panel folding
screen with a scene in silk tapestry on crimson satin from A Heap of Honours on one
side and Symbols of Longevity in powder-gold on the other. There’s also quite a good
enamelled screen from Admiral Wu’s lady.’
‘Yes, well don’t do anything with those two, then,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Just put
them by somewhere where they will be safe. I want to give them to someone as a
present.’
      Faithful went over to Xi-feng and peered into her face.
      ‘What are you staring at her like that for?’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Haven’t you
seen her before?’
      ‘I was wondering why her eyes are so swollen,’ said Faithful.
      ‘Come over here,’ Grandmother Jia commanded, and scrutinized Xi-feng herself.
      ‘It’s because my eyes were itching and I’ve been rubbing them,’ said Xi-feng.
      ‘Are you sure someone hasn’t been upsetting you?’ said Faithful, laughing.
      ‘Who would dare?’ said Xi-feng. ‘And even if they had, I wouldn’t dare to cry on
Her Old Ladyship’s birthday.’
      ‘I should think not indeed,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’m just going to have dinner
now. You can stay with me and watch me eat it, and then you and Zhen’s wife can
share what’s left over. The two of you can help these sisters here to pick up Buddha
beans.’ She indicated the pair of nuns whose presence Xi-feng had been vaguely
aware of on entering. ‘It will add some years to your life. I let Bao-yu and the girls do
it the other day. Now you two must have a go as well, so that no one can accuse me
of favouritism.’
      While she was speaking, the table had been laid and a meat?less meal served
for the two nuns. Then, when they had eaten, a meal with meat in it was served for
Grandmother Jia. When she in turn had finished, the remains of her meal were
carried into the outer room for Xi-feng and You-shi to eat. They had already started
when Grandmother Jia had Xi-luan and Si-jie sent for to join them. After they had
finished and washed their hands, some incense was lit and a pint of beans brought in,
over which the two nuns chanted some prayers. The two young women, each armed
with a pair of chopsticks, then had to pick the beans up one by one and drop them
into a basket, to be boiled next day and given away to passers-by in the street.
While they were thus engaged, Grandmother Jia reclined on her couch and listened
to edifying stories told her by the two nuns.
      Faithful had heard from Amber about Xi-feng’s crying and had been over to
Xi-feng’s apartment herself to find out the reason for it from Patience. Late that
evening, when everyone else had left, she spoke about it to Grandmother Jia.
      ‘Mrs Lian is still crying. It’s because she was shamed in front of everyone by Lady
Xing.’
      ‘Oh?’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Why was that?’
      Faithful told her.
      ‘I think Feng acted quite correctly,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Surely we’re not going
to allow our slaves to insult everyone with impunity just because it’s my birthday? I
expect this was Lady Xing’s way of getting her own back for some grudge or other
that she hadn’t had the courage to tackle her about at the time. It’s hard to see what
other motive she could have had for humiliating her in public.’
    Just at that moment Bao-qin came in and the subject had to be dropped.
Bao-qin’s presence reminded Grandmother Jia of her two young visitors. She called
one of her women to her and gave her a message about them which she was to
convey to the principal womenservants in the Garden.
      ‘Tell them they must treat them just as they do our own young ladies. Anyone I
hear of behaving disrespectfully to either of them will be punished mercilessly.’
      ‘Better let me go,’ said Faithful, before the woman had had time to get away.
‘They’ll never listen to her.’
      She went off at once into the Garden. Her first call was at Sweet-rice Village; but
neither Li Wan nor You-shi was there. The maids there told her that they were in
Tan-chun’s apartment with the others, so she retraced her footsteps and called in at
Autumn Studio. She found Li Wan and You-shi in the Paulownia Room engaged in a
conversation, punctuated by frequent bursts of laughter, with the rest of the
Garden’s little society. They welcomed Faithful with smiles and urged her to be
seated.
      ‘What are you doing here at this late hour?, they asked her.
      ‘I suppose I’m allowed to walk in the Garden if I want to,’ said Faithful, and
passed on Grandmother Jia’s message about Xi-luan and Si-jie.
      Li Wan rose respectfully to receive it and at once sent some?one to transmit it
to the heads of all the apartments and instruct them to pass it on to their
subordinates.
      ‘Lady Jia has wonderful foresight,’ You-shi commented drily. ‘We energetic
younger ones may tie up a dozen servants, but we are still not so effective as her.’
      ‘I don’t know,’ said Li Wan. ‘Cousin Feng may not quite come up to Lady Jia’s
standard, but she doesn’t do too badly. Personally I find her foresight quite uncanny.
Certainly I could never hope to match it.’
      ‘You should have said “poor Cousin Feng”,’ said Faithful. ‘She’s in a bad way at
the moment. During all the years she has been managing things she may not have
put a foot wrong as far as Their Ladyships are concerned, but she has given a great
deal of offence elsewhere. A daughter-in-law’s life must be pretty impossible. If she is
too meek and mild her in-laws will complain that she is stupid and the servants won’t
respect her, yet if she shows any initiative, there is always another set of problems
rising up behind her back for every one that she deals with. In our household, where
there are a certain number of mistresses who used once themselves to be maids, it’s
particularly difficult. Such people are so full of their own importance that they are
always taking offence, and if they are the slightest bit crossed in anything they begin
spreading stories about you or finding other ways of stirring up trouble. I haven’t so
far liked to say anything to Her Old Ladyship about this for fear of making her angry.
If I ever do, people had better watch out, because then the sparks will begin to fly, I
can tell you! Perhaps I shouldn’t say this in front of you, Miss Tan, but you know how
certain people are always carrying on about the way Her Old Ladyship makes a
favourite of Bao-yu. Well now apparently that doesn’t matter any more. That’s just a
“natural preference”. Now it seems they’re angry because Her Old Ladyship has been
favouring you. Did you ever hear of anything so ridiculous?’
      ‘There are a lot of very silly people about,’ said Tan-chun. ‘One really can’t be
bothered with what they say. I often think how nice it would be to live in a smaller
household, even if it meant being poorer. Think how delightful it would be to have
just oneself and one’s parents and one or two brothers and sisters living together as
one happy little family! People look at our great household and all its wealth and
think how happy we must be; they don’t realize that the vexations far outweigh the
advantages.’
      ‘You’re much too thin-skinned, Tan,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m always telling you: you
should pay no attention to what vulgar people say or do but concentrate on enjoying
the luxuries and opportunities that wealth and position make available to us. Others
who lack these things have some reason to com?plain. Why make yourself miserable
when you have got them?’
      ‘We can’t all be as happy-go-lucky as you are,’ said You-shi. ‘All you think about
is amusing yourself with the girls, eating when you are hungry and sleeping when
you are tired. Each year to you is like the last. You haven’t a thought in your head
about the future.’
      ‘It’s the time I spend with the girls here that really matters,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If I die,
I die. What do I care about the future?’
      Li Wan and the others laughed.
      ‘That’s a silly way to talk. Even if you don’t do anything with your life and spend
all the rest of it in here, you surely don’t think that the girls will be staying with you
as well? They’ll all be going off to get married.’
      ‘I can understand why people say your growth has all gone into good looks,’ said
You-shi. ‘You really are a silly fellow.’
      ‘Man’s life is uncertain,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Which of us knows when his time will
come? Even if I die today or tomorrow or this year or next year, at least I shall have
lived my life as I wanted to.’
The others would hardly let him finish what he was saying.
‘Worse and worse! Best not encourage him. What he was saying just now was
simpleton’s talk, but this is raging lunacy!’
      ‘Don’t talk about dying, Cousin Bao,’ said little Xi-luan. ‘Lady Jia and Lady Wang
are sure to feel lonely when all the girls have gone. I will come here and help you
keep them company.’
      Li Wan and You-shi both laughed.
      ‘Now you are talking like a simpleton, young lady. Don’t you think you will be
getting married then as well?’
      Xi-luan was overcome with bashfulness and hung her head. The first watch was
just sounding. They got up then and returned to their various apartments for the
night.
*
On her way back to Grandmother Jia’s, Faithful observed that one of the side gates of
the Garden was shut but not yet barred. There was no one about. A faint light burned
in the duty-room and a sliver of moon half-way up the sky shed a feeble radiance
from above. As she had no companion to talk to, carried no lantern, and was walking
softly, the women in the duty-room seemed not to have noticed her. She had for
some time been wanting to empty her bladder, and this seemed as good an
opportunity as any for doing so. She left the path and began looking for a place
where the grass was not too high to squat down in.
      She had found what looked like a good spot under a large osmanthus tree
behind a Tai-hu rock and was just making her way round the side of the rock to reach
it when a rustle of clothing caused her to jump almost out of her skin. By straining
her eyes she could make out two human shapes. They melted into the bushes at her
arrival, but Faithful had very sharp eyes, and before they disappeared, the faint
moonlight had enabled her to identify one of them by the red top, bouf?fant
hair-style, and tall, somewhat heavy build, as Ying-chun’s head maid, Chess. She
assumed that Chess and some other girl had been using the place as a convenience
and had hidden themselves in the bushes when they saw her coming, intending to
jump out at her presently and give her a scare.
‘Chess, come out of there!’ she called. ‘If you frighten me I shall scream, and then
you will be taken for a thief. This is no time to be playing monkey-tricks, a big girl like
you!’
     These words were spoken in jest with no other motive than to prevent Chess
jumping out and scaring her, but to Chess’s guilty conscience they seemed to imply
that the secret she was hiding had been discovered. She was terrified that Faithful
might cry out and others get to know about it as well, which would be even more
frightful: and as Faithful had always been kind to her in the past, she resolved to
throw herself on her mercy. Running out of the bushes, she knelt down and clung to
her imploringly.
      ‘Faithful, I beg of you, for God’s sake don’t cry out!’
      Not knowing what to make of this exaggerated reaction to her words, Faithful
hastily pulled her to her feet.
      ‘Well, well, what’s all this about?’
      Chess seemed unable to reply, but her body was trembling all over. Faithful was
more mystified than ever. She looked again in the direction from which Chess had
just come and saw a figure lurking there. It looked like a boy’s. She began to guess
the reason for Chess’s terror. A sickening embarrassment made her own heart beat
faster and she could feel her face burning to the very tips of her ears. She was afraid,
too. After a brief silence in which she managed to recover some of her composure,
she asked Chess, in a tremulous whisper, who ‘that other person’ was. Chess sank
once more to her knees.
      ‘He’s my cousin, Faithful,’ she said faintly, ‘my father’s sister’s son.’
      Faithful made a scornful sound, as if she did not believe her; but she was still
too embarrassed to say anything.
      ‘There’s no need to hide,’ Chess called out softly to the boy. ‘My friend here had
already seen you. Come out quickly and kotow.’
      The boy darted out from the cover of the tree, threw himself on his knees in
front of Faithful, and began knocking his head on the ground as if he were pounding
garlic in a mortar. Faithful wanted to turn away, but Chess clung to her tearfully and
beseechingly.
     ‘Our lives are in your hands, Faithful. Be merciful!’
     ‘Of course I shall; you don’t need to ask,’ said Faithful. ‘Tell him to go away.
Whatever happens, I shan’t tell anyone. There’s no need for all this drama.’
     Before she had finished speaking, a voice could be heard from the direction of
the corner gate.
     ‘Miss Faithful’s already gone out. We can bar the gate now.’
Chess was still clinging to her so hard that Faithful could not get away. She had to call
out to the woman from where she stood.
‘No, I’m still here. I’ve been doing something. Just a second: I’ll be out directly.’
Chess, when she heard her say that, was obliged to let her go. The rest will be told in
the following chapter.
CHAPTER 72

Wang Xi-feng refuses to see a
doctor
And Brightie’s wife seeks help
with a betrothal



As Faithful went out of the corner gate, her cheeks were still burning and her heart
was beating wildly. What an extraordinary encounter - and how unexpected! She
began to con?sider what the consequences would be if she were to tell anyone. A
crime involving both sexual delinquency and illicit entry could cost the offenders
their lives - and other persons might well be implicated. She resolved to keep her
discovery to herself. ‘After all,’ she reflected, ‘it is really no business of mine.’ And so,
when she got back to Grandmother Jia’s apartment, she gave only a routine account
of her mission and went to bed without telling anyone about her experience.
But what of Chess? She and her father’s sister’s son - the boy whom Faithful had
discovered with her in the Garden - had often played together as little children. In
those days they were childhood sweethearts, innocently vowing, before they even
knew the full meaning of the vow, that they would be husband and wife when they
grew up or else would never marry. The years passed by and each grew up into a
good-looking adolescent. Significant looks would pass between them when they saw
each other during Chess’s occasional visits home, and they knew, without needing to
tell each other, that the childhood bond between them was as strong as ever. As they
were both dreadfully afraid that their parents would oppose their meeting, they
contrived - he working on his side and she on hers - to buy the support of the Garden
women, so that gates might be left conveniently unbarred and notice obligingly be
given when the coast was clear; and now, today, taking advantage of the confusion
caused by the birthday celebrations, they had met for the first time inside the Garden.
They had not yet reached the point of physical union when Faithful surprised them,
but they had exchanged vows and keepsakes and passionate endearments and were
not far off it. Shortly after their discovery by Faithful, the boy managed to dodge
away through the bushes and slip out of the corner gate unseen.
Chess did not sleep that night. She lay awake until dawn, bitterly regretting that she
had ever agreed to the assignation. Meeting Faithful next day caused her to go hot
and cold by turns, and all day long she felt as wretched and uncomfortable as if she
were carrying a devil’s child inside her. She had lost all her appetite for food and
drink, and whether sitting or standing felt equally jumpy and ill at ease. This
continued for two days. When two days had gone by and still nothing had happened,
she began to feel a little easier.
But then one morning one of the old women from the Garden gate came round and
whispered some news to her.
‘Your cousin’s run away. He hasn’t been home now for three or four days. They’re
out everywhere looking for him.’
A wave of mingled alarm, anger and grief swept over her.
‘Even if she’d told, he ought to have stayed,’ she thought, ‘and we could have died
together. How can he love me, running away like that, without even waiting to find
out?’
As a result of this latest shock she woke up next morning with a feeling of weakness
inside her, and after trying unsuccessfully for a while to drag herself around, was
forced to go back and lie down. This time she was ill in earnest.
When Faithful heard that one of the boys had unaccountably run away and that
Chess was so ill that there was already talk of moving her out of the Garden, she was
sure that in either case it was fear that she might betray them that had been the
cause. So concerned did she feel about this that, on the pretext of paying a sick visit,
she went to see Chess and reassure her. As soon as she could get the others out of
the room, she swore a most solemn oath that she would never give her away.
‘So just stop worrying and get better.’ she told her. ‘You are too young to throw
your life away because of a thing like this.’
Chess clung to her hand and wept.
‘Dear Faithful! We’ve known each other now since we were little girls. You have
always been nice to me, and I have always respected you. If you really don’t tell
anyone about this stupid mistake of mine, I promise to honour you as if you were my
mother. From now on, each day I live will be a day I owe to you. If I get better, I shall
set up a tablet with your name on it and kotow and burn incense to it every day and
pray that you may have a long and happy life. But if I die, then I hope I may be reborn
as a dog or an ass, if only I can have the chance to repay you.’
She went on to say much more in this vein, the tears all the while streaming down
her cheeks, so that Faithful herself became affected and began to cry as well.
‘It’s your own imagination that is making you so ill,’ she said, shaking her head sadly.
‘Why should I want to go out of my way to destroy your reputation? To win
someone’s approval? Surely you know me better than that? In any case, I am much
too shy to talk about such things. Please stop worrying. From now on you must start
getting better. And when you are better, try to live a little more sensibly in future.
Don’t go getting yourself into scrapes like this again.’
Chess nodded her head vigorously upon the pillow. After speaking a few more words
to comfort her, Faithful took her leave.
Faithful had noticed that Xi-feng had been somewhat off colour during these past few
days. She happened to know that Jia Lian was out and thought she might as well drop
in on Xi-feng on her way back and ask how she was. The servants on the inner gate
stood up as she approached and remained standing until she disappeared into
Xi-feng’s court?yard. As she entered the reception room, Patience was just emerging
from inside. She smiled when she saw Faithful and hurried up to her.
‘She’s just eaten and now she’s having an afternoon nap,’ she said in a low voice.
‘Come into the other room and we’ll have a chat.’
At her insistence Faithful accompanied her into the room on the east side of the
reception room and sat down with her. A junior maid poured them both some tea.
‘Tell me, what’s been the matter with your mistress during these past few days?’
said Faithful. ‘She seems so lethargic.’
Patience sighed.
‘It’s not just these last few days,’ she said, having first looked round to make sure
that no one else was within hearing. ‘It goes back a month at least. It’s just that all
the work of the last few days and that upset with Lady Xing coming on top of it have
made her worse so that people are beginning to notice.
‘In that case why doesn’t she call a doctor?’
‘My dear Faithful,’ said Patience, ‘surely you know our Mrs Lian better than that?
It’s not just calling a doctor or taking medicine that she objects to. Sometimes,
because I can’t bear to see her looking so ill, I’ll ask her, quite casually, “How do you
feel today?”; but even that will be enough to make her angry. She says there’s
nothing wrong with her and that I’m trying to make her ill by talking about it. In spite
of feeling so poorly, she still insists on keeping up with everything that goes on in the
household. It worries me. How can she ever get better if she herself won’t face up to
the fact that she is ill?’
‘She really ought to call a doctor,’ said Faithful. ‘Surely it would be a relief just to
know what she is suffering from?’
Patience sighed.
‘Whatever it is, if you ask me, it’s something pretty serious.
‘Oh?’ said Faithful. ‘What kind of trouble is it then?’
Patience leaned forwards and spoke very softly into her ear.
‘During this past month, ever since she had her last period, it’s been drip-drip,
drip-drip all the time. Surely that’s serious, isn’t it?’
‘Aiyo!’ said Faithful. ‘It sounds as if the blood-gate has burst.’
Patience gave a little laugh.
‘Oh Faithful, you are a baby! What a thing to say! Poor Mrs Lian!’
Faithful coloured, and she laughed as well, a trifle sheepishly.
‘Well I don’t know what it means myself. It’s just that I heard them saying it about
my elder sister. You’ve probably forgotten: she died of something rather like this. I
was too young at the time to know what was the matter with her, but I remember
hearing my mother talking about it to my sister’s mother-in-law and one of them
saying “The blood-gate’s burst” and wondering at the time what it could mean. Later
on, when I heard more about her illness, I thought I under?stood, but I don’t suppose
I did really.’
While they were talking, a little maid came in with a message.
‘Old Mrs Zhu has been again. We told her the mistress had just laid down for her
afternoon nap so she went off to Lady Wang’s room.’
Patience nodded.
‘Which Mrs Zhu is that?’ said Faithful.
‘She’s an official marriage-broker working for one of the yamens,’ said Patience.
‘She’s come on behalf of Sir Sun Somebody-or-other who wants one of our young Jia
ladies for his son. Old nuisance! She’s been around here every day during the past
few days, flashing her card at everyone.’
At that moment another little maid came hurrying into the room.
‘Mr Lian’s back!’
Patience hurried out to meet him as he stepped into the reception room outside. He
began walking into the side room, since it was the room that Patience had just come
out of, but halted on the threshold when he caught sight of Faithful sitting inside on
the kang.
‘Ah, my dear Faithful!’ he said, smiling broadly. ‘What favourable wind has blown
you to our humble abode?’
Faithful smiled back at him. She made no effort to get up.
‘I came here to pay my respects to you and Mrs Lian, but one of you was out and
the other one was having a nap.’
‘You’re so busy all the year round waiting on Her Old Ladyship,’ said Jia Lian, still
smiling, ‘it’s we who should come to see you, not the other way round.’ He paused.
‘As a matter of fact it’s rather a stroke of luck that you have come here today. I was
on my way to see you just now. The only reason I dropped in here was because this
gown I am wearing is too hot and I wanted to change into something cooler before
going on to see you. But God is good to me, it seems: your being here means that I
am saved the trouble of going out again.’
He sat himself down in a chair.
‘What was it you wanted to see me about?’ said Faithful.
Jia Lian gave a preliminary laugh.
‘Something I’ve forgotten about that you may perhaps remember. On Her Old
Ladyship’s birthday last year some travelling monk made her a present of a Buddha’s
hand modelled in coloured wax. She was so taken with it that she immediately had it
put on display somewhere where she could admire it. When I was going through the
inventory of her ornaments the other day in preparation for these birthday
celebrations, I found an entry for the thing but couldn’t discover where it had got to;
and as I wasn’t able to tick it off on the inventory, the steward of the ornaments
room has been on to me a couple of times since then asking me to find out where it
is. Do you know? Has Her Old Ladyship still got the thing on display somewhere in
her own apartment, or has she handed it over to someone else?’
‘After she’d had it on display for a couple of days, she grew tired of it and gave it to
Mrs Lian,’ said Faithful. ‘I don’t know why you should be asking me about it! I can
even remember the day, and the person I sent round with it. It was Old Wang’s wife.
You should ask Mrs Lian or Patience about it. They will tell you.’
Patience, who had just been seeing to some clothes, came hurrying in again.
‘Certainly she gave it to us. It’s upstairs here in the loft. Mrs Lian long ago sent
someone to tell the steward that we’d got it. I suppose he was too lazy to make a
note of it at the time. It’s too bad that he should be making a fuss about it now.’
‘If she gave it to your mistress,’ said Jia Lian, ‘how is it that I don’t know anything
about it? I think you must have been hiding it from me.’
‘The mistress did tell you about it,’ said Patience. ‘You wanted to give it to someone
as a present, but the mistress wouldn’t let you. She had a terrible job persuading you
to let her keep it. Fancy your forgetting - and then having the nerve to accuse us of
hiding it from you! If we were going to start hiding things from you, we could do a bit
better than that! We have been given things ten times more valuable, but invariably
you have been told.’
Jia Lian looked down smilingly and reflected, then clapped his hands suddenly as he
remembered.
‘Why yes, of course. How stupid of me! I’m forgetting everything these days; No
wonder people get so cross with me. I’m not the man I was!’
‘It’s hardly surprising,’ said Faithful. ‘You have so much to do and so many people
to deal with. By the time you’ve had a couple of drinks, you can’t be expected to
remember very much!’
She got up to go. Jia Lian too rose to his feet.
‘Do stay a little longer. I want to ask you a favour.’
He turned rather crossly to one of the junior maids.
‘Can’t we have some better tea than this? Get some clean cover-cups and use some
of that tea we were given yesterday.’
He turned back to Faithful.
‘During these past few days, because of Her Old Ladyship’s birthday celebrations,
we’ve got through the last few thousand taels we had. Our house-rents and
land-rents aren’t due in until the ninth month. Until then we have nothing. Yet soon
we shall be having to buy presents for the Princess of Nan-an’s birthday, and there
are the presents we shall have to send to Her Grace on the Double Ninth and various
weddings and funerals to provide for. We need at least two or three thousand taels
to pay for these things. It would be difficult to borrow that much outside at present;
and as they say self-help is the best help, I am turning to you to ask if you would be
prepared, for all our sakes, to commit a very tiny little crime. Could you possibly look
out a few gold and silver things that Her Old Ladyship would not be likely to miss and
smuggle a boxful of them out to me enough for me to raise about a thousand taels
on - just to tide us over the next week or two? As soon as our money comes in I shall
redeem them and give them back to you. I promise you shan’t get into any trouble.’
Faithful smiled.
‘Nobody can say you aren’t ingenious. Whatever will you think of next?’
‘Look, I’m not just saying this to flatter you,’ said Jia Lian, ‘but though I know plenty
of other people who have a thousand taels’ worth of stuff in their keeping, they none
of them have your courage or intelligence. If I made a proposal like this to one of
them, I’d frighten the wits out of them. That’s why I turn to you. Better one stroke of
the big bell than a thousand tinkles on the little cymbal!’
At that moment one of the junior maids from Grandmother Jia’s apartment came in.
She seemed somewhat out of breath.
‘Her Old Ladyship wants you. I’ve been ages looking for you. I never thought you
would be here.’
Faithful hurried out after her. Jia Lian went inside to see Xi-feng.
Xi-feng had, as a matter of fact, been awake for some time. She had heard Jia Lian
make his request but, not liking to intervene, had remained lying where she was. She
knew that Faithful had left.
‘Well?’ she asked as Jia Lian entered. ‘Is it settled?’
‘Not quite,’ said Jia Lian, smiling. ‘As good as. I think if you were to go over and have
a word with her, it would tip the balance.’
‘It’s nothing to do with me, what you get up to,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Suppose she does
agree. Once you’ve got your hands on the money, you’ll like as not forget all your fine
promises and just hang on to her stuff. And what can she do then? Nothing. Then
suppose Grandmother finds out? Her confidence in me, that it has taken me all these
years to build up, will be completely shattered.’
‘Come on, be an angel!’ Jia Lian pleaded. ‘I promise you won’t regret it.’
‘Why, what will you give me?’ said Xi-feng.
‘Just say,’ said Jia Lian. ‘Anything you like.’
‘I know what to ask him for,’ said Patience, who had been near at hand listening.
‘You know you said earlier there was something you were planning to do that you
would need one or two hundred taels for: ask him to let you have two hundred taels
of the money he raises on pawn. That ought to suit both of you.’
‘Thank you for reminding me,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Yes, I will.’
‘You are a terrible woman!’ said Jia Lian. ‘Never mind things to pawn, if you had a
mind to, you could probably let me have four or five thousand taels cash. All I’m
asking you to do is say a few words for me - and even for that you want to charge! No
wonder you and I -’
Xi-feng leaped to her feet angrily, breaking in before he could finish.
‘Well, what of it? The “four or five thousand taels” is my own money, isn’t it? I
haven’t cheated you Jias out of it. Just about everyone in this establishment
nowadays seem to spend their time discussing my shortcomings. It only needed you.
Well, they say that when a house is haunted it’s one’s own ghost that invites the
others in. Why do you always assume that any money I have must be Jia money? I
haven’t noticed that your family is so staggeringly rich. You’re not exactly millionaires,
are you? We Wangs could probably keep you going for the rest of your lives just with
the sweepings from our floor! I don’t want to boast, but just take a look at the
dowries that Aunt Wang and I brought with us when we came here and try matching
them, item for item, with things of your own.’
Jia Lian laughed.
‘How you do fly off the handle! I was only joking. You can have a hundred or two
hundred taels now if you need them. I couldn’t give you much more than that, but
that much at least I can manage. Take it now and speak to her when you’ve spent it.
How’s that for an offer?’
‘I’m not in that much of a hurry,’ said Xi-feng. ‘It isn’t pennies for a laying-out I’m
after.’
‘Bless my soul, what a passion you’re in!’ said Jia Lian.
Xi-feng laughed.
‘No, I’m not really. But I found what you said just now very wounding. The day after
tomorrow is the anniversary of Er-jie’s death. Since we were sisters for a little while, I
thought the least I could do was visit her grave and make her a few offerings. She
didn’t give us a son, it’s true, but we mustn’t “let the dust of those who have gone
before get into the eyes of those who follow”. That’s what I wanted the money for.’
Jia Lian said nothing for some moments. Xi-feng had effectively shut him up.
‘You are very thoughtful,’ he said eventually. Then, after another pause, ‘Since you
won’t need the money till the day after tomorrow, we may as well wait and see
whether or not Faithful will let us have the things. If she does, you will be able to
take what you want after I have pawned them.’
At that moment Brightie’s wife came hurrying in.
‘Well?’ Xi-feng asked her. ‘Is it settled?’
‘No,’ said Brightie’s wife. ‘Nothing doing. It’s as I said: unless we have your backing
for it, we shan’t get anywhere.’
‘What’s this?’ said Jia Lian.
‘Oh, nothing serious,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Brightie and his wife have a son who is
seventeen this year and not yet married and they wanted to get Lady Wang’s Sunset
for him. They haven’t done anything about it previously, because they didn’t know
what Lady Wang might have in mind for her. Now it seems that because Sunset has
had so much illness during the past year, Lady Wang has sent her back to her parents
and said they can choose a husband for her themselves. Brightie’s wife asked me if I
would speak to the parents on her behalf but I thought that as the families were so
obviously suited, her parents couldn’t possibly have any objection to the match and
that Brightie and his wife would be able to arrange it themselves. But it seems that I
was wrong.’
‘It doesn’t matter, does it?’ said Jia Lian. ‘Surely there are plenty of others as good
as Sunset they could get for him, or even better?’
‘That’s as may be, sir,’ said Brightie’s wife with a somewhat artificial smile, ‘but if
people see that we are not even good enough for the likes of them, it doesn’t do
much for our prestige. I took a lot of trouble choosing that girl for him and I hoped
that you and Mrs Lian would be so very kind as to settle the matter for us, for I know
you could do so if you wished. But Mrs Lian she said no, there was no need, they’d be
sure to agree. Well, I got a woman to speak to the parents for me, and now she’s just
come back from them with a flea in her ear. I don’t think there’s any objection as far
as the girl is concerned. I’ve sounded her out once or twice in the past and as far as I
could make out she would be quite willing. It’s that stupid old couple with their high
and mighty ideas that are the stumbling-block.’
These words were intended to put Jia Lian and Xi-feng on their mettle; but Xi-feng
could hardly take the initiative in her husband’s presence and watched Jia Lian in
silence to see what he would do, whilst Jia Lian for his part had too much on his mind
to be bothered with anything so trifling. He would probably have ignored it
altogether were it not for the fact that Brightie and his wife were rather special
servants. Xi-feng had brought them from her father’s house when she was married
and they had served her devotedly ever since. Jia Lian realized that to be refused
help now that they had openly requested it would be regarded by them as a very
great loss of face.
‘Well, it’s hardly a matter calling for so much palaver,’ he said impatiently. ‘Be on
your way now and stop worrying about it! I’ll send a couple of senior people
tomorrow with the betrothal presents to have a talk with her father and tell him that
I am sponsoring the match. If he still holds out against it, I’ll have him over and talk
to him myself.’
Brightie’s wife looked questioningly at Xi-feng. In answer to her look Xi-feng made a
barely perceptible movement with her lips, whereupon Brightie’s wife got down on
her knees and made Jia Lian a kotow.
‘It’s your mistress you should be kotowing to,’ said Jia Lian hurriedly. ‘Although I
shall be talking to her father, you’ll still have to persuade your mistress to send for
the mother and have a word with her, otherwise it will seem too much like coercion.
After all, you’ll want to be on speaking terms with your son’s in-laws after the boy is
married.’
‘If you are prepared to take so much trouble on their behalf, you surely don’t think
that I am going to stand idly by?’ said Xi-feng. ‘All right, Brightie’s wife, you’ve heard
what we are going to do for you: now I want you to do something for me. I want you
to ask your husband to chase after all the people I have lent money to and see to it
that all the loan accounts are cleared by the end of this year. Tell him I must have
every penny back, or he’ll be in trouble! My reputation is quite bad enough already. If
I go on lending money at interest for another year, people will be wanting to eat me
up alive.’
‘It isn’t like you to be so timid, Mrs Lian,’ said Brightie’s wife, smiling. ‘Who would
dare to criticize you? It seems such a shame, after the work we’ve put into this, to
call all the money in again.’
‘ I don’t want it for myself in any case,’ said Xi-feng; ‘it was a means of
supplementing the housekeeping, because without it our expenditure was so much
greater than our income. Mr Lian’s and my allowance for the month, including the
allowances for four maids, is less than twenty taels: barely enough to keep us going
for four or five days. If I hadn’t scraped together a bit of extra on the side, I don’t
know what sort of hovel we should have been living in by now. And so now I’ve got
myself a bad name. I’m a usurer. Very well, I’ll call it all in again and stop lending
money altogether. I can spend money as fast as anyone else - though how we are
supposed to manage if we just all sit back and spend without a thought in our heads
for the future I fail to understand. Lady Wang spent two months worrying about how
she was going to manage for Her Old Ladyship’s birthday. In the end I reminded her
about four or five boxes of big, useless bronze things in the rear upstairs store-room
and suggested that we should try pawning them. We did, and raised three hundred
taels, which was barely enough to tide her over the celebrations. And you know of
course about my chiming clock. I sold that for three hundred and sixty taels, but in
less than half a month every penny of it had gone into paying bills. Now it seems the
menfolk are running short and someone has had the bright idea of trying to get
something out of Her Old Ladyship. Another year like this and we shall be pawning
our jewellery and our clothes!’
Brightie’s wife laughed.
‘Well, I dare say every one of you ladies has enough jewellery to keep you all for
the rest of your lives, if she had a mind to pawn it.’
‘No doubt it’s silly of me,’ said Xi-feng, ‘but personally I could never bring myself to
live like that. - Oh, I must tell you,’ she said, changing the subject, ‘I had rather a
funny dream last night. Someone - I didn’t know who he was, though he looked
familiar - came and told me that Her Grace had sent him to ask me for a hundred
lengths of brocade. I said “Which Her Grace?”. He told me a name, but it was the
wrong one, so I refused. Then he came forward and tried to take the stuff from me by
force. That was when I woke up.’
‘That’s because your obligations to Her Grace are so much on your mind during the
daytime,’ said Brightie’s wife, laughing.
The words were barely out of her mouth when a messenger from the Palace was
announced - a little eunuch sent by Xia Bing-zhong, the eunuch Master of the
Bedchamber. Jia Lian frowned when he heard the announcement.
‘I wonder what it is this time? You’d have thought he’d had enough out of us
already this year.’
‘Make yourself scarce and let me speak to him,’ said Xi-feng. ‘If it’s only a little thing
he wants, we needn’t worry; but if it’s something big he’s after, I think I know how to
handle this.’
Jia Lian slipped into one of the side rooms at the back, while Xi-feng gave orders for
the little eunuch to be brought in. She made him sit down and accept a cup of tea
before inquiring about the purpose of his visit.
‘Daddy Xia saw a house today that he would very much like to buy, but he’s two
hundred taels short of the price they are asking. He sent me to ask you if you happen
to have one or two hundred taels on you you could let him have just for the time
being. He will pay you back in a day or two.’
‘Why talk of paying back?’ said Xi-feng genially. ‘We’ve got plenty of money, just
help yourselves. Why don’t we just say that if we are ever short of money, we’ll come
and borrow some from you.’
‘Oh, Daddy Xia also told me to tell you that he still hasn’t paid back the twelve
hundred taels he owes you from the last two times, but he says he will definitely pay
it all back to you by the New Year.’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘Your Daddy Xia is an old fuss-pot, tell him. He really shouldn’t worry his head over
such trifles. I hope he won’t think I am complaining, but if everyone were as
scrupulous as he is about paying back the money they owe us, we should be
millionaires. About this money he wants now, though: I wonder if I have got that
much ready cash to give him. He’s certainly very welcome to it if I have.’
She called Brightie’s wife to her.
‘Pop out and see if you can get two hundred taels for me, will you? It doesn’t
matter where from.’
Brightie’s wife at once caught on to the little game her mistress was playing.
‘I’ve just been trying to get hold of some,’ she said brightly. ‘That’s why I’m here. I
couldn’t get any outside, so I thought you might have some.’
‘You people aren’t very resourceful,’ said Xi-feng crossly. ‘Why is it that when you
want money you always have to fall back on me?’
She called Patience in.
‘Patience, get out my two gold necklaces and see if you can pawn them for four
hundred taels.’
Patience left the room and came back presently with an embroidered box in which
were two magnificent collars of jewellery, every bit as fine as any that could be found
in the Palace, each carefully wrapped up in a piece of silk brocade. One of them was
made of gold wire and pearls the size of lotus-seeds; the other was of
kingfisher-feathers and gold, studded with precious stones. She went off with these
and returned some time later with the four hundred taels, half of which Xi-feng
wrapped up for the little eunuch, while the other half she handed over to Brightie’s
wife to buy presents for the Mid-Autumn festival with.
The little eunuch now took his leave. Xi-feng sent someone to carry the money for
him as far as the main gate.
‘These people really are a pest!’ said Jia Lian emerging from his hiding-place. ‘There
seems to be no end to their borrowing.’
‘Just as I’d been telling you about my dream,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Talk of the devil!’
‘Yesterday it was Chamberlain Zhou,’ said Jia Lian. ‘The first thing he said when he
opened his mouth was could I lend him a thousand taels. Because I hesitated a bit
before saying yes, he started looking huffy. I can see us making any number of
enemies this way. What we need right now is a windfall of forty or fifty thousand
taels!’
Patience came in to help Xi-feng wash and change preparatory to going over to wait
on Grandmother Jia at dinner. Jia Lian went off to his outside study. He had barely got
there when Lin Zhi-xiao came hurrying in, evidently bursting with some news. When
Jia Lian asked him what it was, he said that Jia Yu-cun bad been demoted.
‘I don’t know what it was for,’ he said. ‘It may not be true, in any case.’
‘Even if it’s not,’ said Jia Lian, ‘he’s sure to get thrown out of that job sooner or later.
We’d be well advised to have as little to do with him as possible.’
‘I’m sure you’re right, sir,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao. ‘But that’s easier said than done. Sir She
is on very good terms with him, and Sir Zheng likes him. Everyone knows that he is a
regular visitor here.’
‘Well, I suppose as long as we don’t get involved in any of his schemes it shouldn’t
matter,’ said Jia Lian. ‘You’d better go and make some more inquiries. Find out if he
really has been demoted, and if so, what for.’
Lin Zhi-xiao said he would do so, but showed no inclination to leave. Instead he sat
down in a chair and began talking to Jia Lian about this and that. Presently they got
on to the subject of the household’s financial difficulties. Lin Zhi-xiao took the
opportunity of airing his own idea of a solution.
‘We’ve got too big a staff,’ he said. ‘We ought to pick a day when there’s no other
business on hand and ask Her Old Ladyship and Sir Zheng if we can’t give some of
those older servants who are a bit past it now an honourable discharge. It would be a
kindness to them, because they’ve all got little jobs of their own to fall back on, and
it would mean a big saving for us in the amount we have to spend every year on
wages and keep. And there’s another thing: there are far too many maids. As the
proverb says, “The times get worse but never better.” It’s no good trying to live in
the style we used to keep up twenty or thirty years ago. If every apartment which in
the past used to employ eight girls were now to employ six and those which used to
employ four girls were to make do with two, the saving in wages and keep would be
enormous. Most of those girls are in any case old enough now to be married. If we
pair them off now with our boys, before we know where we are they will be breeding
new servants for us.’
‘I’m entirely in agreement with you,’ said Jia Lian. ‘The trouble is that as Sir Zheng
has only just got back, he doesn’t want to be bothered with anything yet. At the
moment even quite important matters are having to be shelved. We’d never get him
to discuss a small domestic matter like this. A couple of days ago an official
marriage-broker came round here with all her credentials, wanting to arrange a
match between her client’s son and one of our young ladies, but Lady Wang said that
Sir Zheng was so happy to be home again with his family all around him - she says
he’s hardly stopped talking about “family togetherness” since the day he got back -
that she felt sure it would upset him to have to talk about the girls getting married
and leaving home, and she forbade anyone to mention it to him.’
‘Why, I’m sure that’s as it should be,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao. ‘Her Ladyship is a very
thoughtful lady.’
‘Talking of marriage-brokers, that reminds me,’ said Jia Lian. ‘Our Brightie’s boy
wants to marry Sunset from Her Ladyship’s room and Brightie’s wife has been asking
me if I would arrange it for them. It seems to me that it’s hardly important enough
for that. Could one of you go round and see the girl’s father for me? You could tell
him that it has my approval.’
Lin Zhi-xiao agreed to do so, but without much enthusiasm. After a longish pause he
added,
‘I think if I was you, sir, I wouldn’t get myself involved. That boy of Brightie’s is only
a lad, but already he’s drinking too much and gambling and getting up to all sorts of
capers. I know they’re only slaves, but marriage is for a lifetime, after all. I haven’t
seen Sunset myself for some years, but by all accounts she’s grown up into a very
presentable young woman. It would seem a pity to throw her away on the likes of
him.’
‘Oh, so Brightie’s boy has been misbehaving, has he?’ said Jia Lian. ‘It seems to me
that it’s not a wife he needs but a thundering good hiding. I think you’d better give
him one to get on with and then lock him up and ask his parents what they propose
to do about him.’
Lin Zhi-xiao laughed.
‘We don’t have to do that now, surely? Next time he gives trouble, we’ll let you
know and you can deal with him then. It doesn’t seem quite the time to tackle him
about it now.’
Jia Lian made no reply and Lin Zhi-xiao shortly afterwards got up and left.
That evening Xi-feng summoned Sunset’s mother to her in order to propose the
marriage with Brightie’s son. Sunset’s mother had all along been opposed to it, but it
was so flattering to have Xi-feng talking to her like this, woman to woman, that she
found herself agreeing to everything in spite of her?self. When, some time after she
had left, Jia Lian returned, Xi-feng asked whether he had spoken yet to the father.
‘No, I haven’t,’ said Jia Lian. ‘I was going to talk to him about it, but then I heard
that that boy of Brightie’s is turning out a thoroughly bad lot, so I put it off. If what
they told me about him is true, I think we ought to give him a good, sharp lesson or
two before we set about getting a wife for him.’
‘None of us Wangs seem to find much favour with you people nowadays,’ said
Xi-feng frostily. ‘I suppose since I don’t meet with your approval, it’s hardly surprising
that you should be dissatisfied with my servants. I’ve already spoken to her mother
about it and she was overjoyed. What am I supposed to do now? Call her in again
and tell her it’s all off?’
‘No, no,’ said Jia Lian. ‘If you’ve already arranged it with her mother, it will have to
stand. But you’ll have to have a word with Brightie tomorrow and tell him to do
something about that boy.’
Our narrative moves at this point to the unfortunate object of these manoeuvrings.
*
When, some days previous to this, Lady Wang sent Sunset back home to her parents,
it was on the express understanding that they might choose for her whatever
son-in-law they wished. Brightie’s visits to her parents filled Sunset with foreboding.
Her union with Jia Huan had not yet been approved, but she had long since given her
heart to him and knew that she could never be happy with Brightie’s son. When,
shortly after that, she learned that Brightie’s son was a drunkard and a gambler and
hideously ugly into the bargain, she became even more alarmed. The fear that
Brightie and his wife might use their influence with Xi-feng to force her parents to
accept the match finally made her so frantic that, on the evening of the day on which
these other events took place, she told her younger sister, Moonrise, to go in secret
to Aunt Zhao and try to find out exactly what was happening.
Now Aunt Zhao had always got on well with Sunset and had been longing for the day
when Sunset could become Jia Huan’s concubine, thus providing her at the same
time with an ally. It was an unexpected blow to her when Sunset was sent back home
to her parents, and she was constantly urging Jia Huan to go and ask Lady Wang if he
might have her for himself; but partly because Jia Huan was too bashful to open his
mouth about it, and partly because he did not in any case care about her very much
(after all, he thought, she was only a maid; there would be plenty even better than
her in the future) he hung back, hoping that the matter would eventually be dropped.
But Aunt Zhao did not give up so easily, and the night that Sunset sent her younger
sister to see her she tried to enlist Jia Zheng’s support. Jia Zheng was unenthusiastic.
‘What’s the hurry?’ he said. ‘Wait until the boys have spent another year or two at
their studies, it will be soon enough then. I’ve already got my eye on a couple of girls,
one for Bao-yu and one for Huan, but I think they are too young yet. I am afraid that
if they had the girls now, it would get in the way of their studies. You can speak to me
about this again in a year or two’s time.’
Aunt Zhao would have gone on trying, but just at that moment there was a loud
crash outside which made them both jump.
You will have to look at the next chapter, however, in order to find out what caused
it.
CHAPTER 73

A half-witted servant-girl picks up a
highly embarrassing object
And an easy-going young mistress refuses
to inquire into a theft



As we were saying at the end of the last chapter, Aunt Zhao and Jia Zheng were
interrupted in the midst of their dis?cussion by a sudden crash. The maids, when
questioned, said that it had been caused by an outer casement of one of the
windows falling. It could not have been properly fastened and must have slipped its
catch. After first roundly cursing them, Aunt Zhao went outside with them to
supervise its replacement. When she came in again, she helped Jia Zheng to settle
down for the night. And so we leave them.
*
Meanwhile, over at Green Delights, Bao-yu had just gone to bed. The maids were
themselves on the point of doing so when a sudden knocking was heard at the
courtyard gate. The old woman who opened it recognized the caller as a maid of
Aunt Zhao’s called Magpie, and asked her what she wanted; but instead of answering,
the girl pushed past her and rushed straight inside. She found Bao-yu already lying
down, but engaged in bantering conversation with Skybright and a couple of other
maids who were sitting on the edge of his bed.
     ‘What’s the matter?’ they asked when they saw who their visitor was. ‘What
brings you out at this hour?’
     ‘I’ve come to warn you,’ said Magpie, addressing herself in an urgent whisper to
Bao-yu. ‘I heard my mistress just now jabbering to Sir Zheng about something, and
though I couldn’t make out what they were talking about, I heard him say “Bao-yu” a
couple of times. I thought I’d better put you on your guard in case he asks to see you
tomorrow about anything.’
     She turned and hurried out again as soon as she had finished speaking. Aroma
told someone to run after her and ask her to stay for a cup of tea, but she was afraid
of being shut inside the Garden when they closed the gate, and insisted on going
back immediately.
     Bao-yu knew that in Aunt Zhao’s twisted imagination he was regarded as an
enemy, and though he did not know what she had said, the mere fact that she had
been talking about him was enough to make him feel uncomfortable all over, much
as Monkey did when he heard Tripitaka reciting the spell for tightening the iron band
round his head. After giving the matter some thought, he concluded that the only
practical way in which he could prepare himself for the morrow would be by revising
his texts. Should his father take it into his head to test him, he reasoned, then if only
he could be word-perfect in his texts, it would not be so difficult to bluff his way
through whatever else he might ask him. Having made the decision, he hurriedly
threw a gown over his shoulders and prepared to begin some revision, bitterly
regretting that Jia Zheng’s silence on the subject of lessons since his last return from
duty had lulled him into a false sense of security.
      ‘I ought to have had more sense,’ he told himself. ‘One really ought to do a little
bit every day, to keep in practice.’
      He began to reckon up how much he could still recite from memory. He found
that there was little more than The Great Learning, The Doctrine of the Mean and
the two halves of the Analects that he could be absolutely sure of. The first half of
Mencius he knew reasonably well, but certainly not well enough to be able to carry
on from any sentence given him at random. The second half was virtually terra
incognita. Of the Five Classics he was fairly familiar with the Poetry Classic because
he was frequently having to read bits of it in connection with his own versifying.
Though far from word-perfect, he probably knew it well enough to scrape through a
test. He could not remember any of the other classics at all; but fortunately his father
had so far never asked him to study them, so probably it would not matter. When it
came to Old Style Prose, the case was rather different. Over the past few years he
had read extracts from the Zuo, Gong-yang and Gu-liang commentaries on the Spring
and Autumn Annals and various Han and Tang pieces, but he had only dipped into
them as the fancy took him; he had not done any serious work on them. There was
certainly no question of his being able to remember them. There was even less
likelihood of his being able to pass muster on the Examination Essay. He had always
detested this style of writing in any case. The Sage himself didn’t write that way, he
argued, so how could one hope to expound the inner meaning of his teachings
through such a medium? It was no more than a device used by vulgar
fortune-seekers for starting themselves off on the golden road to success. Before he
left, Jia Zheng had selected a hundred of these essays for him to read; but Bao-yu had
only glanced at them occasionally, reading a paragraph here and a paragraph there as
some particularly felicitous expression or the extrava?gance, humour or melancholy
of the writer happened to catch his attention. He had never settled down to the
serious analytical examination of even a single essay.
      He began to revise; but the trouble was that whatever he revised now, he was
sure to be asked about something else next day, and the whole night would not be
long enough to revise everything. It soon became apparent that all he was
succeeding in doing was getting himself into an even worse state of nerves than he
had been in to begin with and, while studying to no purpose himself, preventing a
whole roomful of girls from sleeping as well.
      Aroma and the other senior maids could at least occupy themselves by trimming
his lamp, pouring him cups of tea and so forth; but the younger ones could neither
go to bed nor find any employment to keep themselves awake, and sat about the
place, drooping and nodding in various attitudes of fatigue. Skybright became
indignant.
      ‘Lazy little wretches! You sleep all day as it is. Just for once in your lives you are
asked to stay up late, and look at you! If you don’t liven yourselves up a bit, I shall
come and stick pins in you all!’
      As she said this, there was a loud bang from the outer room. It turned out to
have been caused by a little maid who had dozed off while sitting on the kang and in
doing so had bumped her head against the partition. Waking with a start just as
Skybright was uttering this threat, she assumed that the bump on the head she had
just received must have been dealt her by Skybright. To the great amusement of the
other girls she began tearfully begging her for mercy.
      ‘Oh no! Please, Skybright! I promise I won’t do it again!’
      ‘Don’t punish her,’ Bao-yu called out. ‘You ought to allow those younger ones to
go to bed. And you older ones too - you don’t all need to stay up. You should be
taking it in turns to get some sleep.’
      ‘Little ancestor!’ said Aroma exasperatedly. ‘You get on with your work! Just for
this one night try to concentrate all your energies on studying. Once you’ve got over
this hurdle; you can make what other arrangements you like!’
     She sounded so earnest that for the next few minutes Bao-yu did in fact
concentrate on his revision. Musk handed him a cup of tea to moisten his lips with
while he recited. In taking it from her he noticed that she had only a short tunic on
over her pantaloons.
     ‘It gets very cold at this time of night,’ he said. ‘You really ought to put
something else on.’
     Musk smiled grimly and pointed at his book.
     ‘Just forget about me for a while, could you? Get your mind fastened on this!’
     Hardly had she finished saying this than Parfumée - or Aventurin’ as Bao-yu now
called her - came running in from outside in a panic.
     ‘Oh God! A man’s just jumped down from the wall!’
     ‘Where? Where?’ cried the others, and began shouting for the older servants to
go and look.
     To Skybright this scare came as a blessing in disguise. Observing what heavy
weather Bao-yu was making of his revision and foreseeing that if he wore himself out
by staying up all night he would be in no condition for facing his ordeal in the
morning, she had been casting about desperately for some means of rescuing him
from it altogether. This panic about an intruder gave her an idea.
      ‘Why don’t you take advantage of this to get off tomorrow?’ she asked him. ‘Tell
them that the shock has made you ill.’
      This was a suggestion after Bao-yu’s own heart. He had the watch called and
ordered them to light their lanterns and make a thorough search. But no intruder
could be found.
      ‘I expect one of you young ladies had to go out for something in the dark and
being still half-asleep, took the bough of a tree moving in the wind for a man,’ they
said.
      ‘Nonsense!’ said Skybright. ‘You only say that as an excuse, because you haven’t
been keeping watch properly and you’re afraid of getting into trouble. It wasn’t only
one of us who saw him; a whole lot of us did; and Bao-yu was with us. The shock of it
has made him quite ill. His face looks terrible and he’s burning hot all over. I shall be
going over to Her Ladyship’s presently to get him a sedative. She’s sure to ask me
what has upset him. What am I supposed to tell her? That he took fright from looking
at a tree?’
      This seemed to scare the women, for they made no reply but hurried off again
to continue their search. Meanwhile Skybright and Aventurin went off to ask for
some pills, deliberately making as big a fuss as possible to make sure that everyone
knew that Bao-yu had been taken ill as a result of seeing something alarming in the
Garden. Lady Wang sent someone to fetch the medicine for the two girls and gave
orders for the members of the watch to make a full investigation. She was
particularly anxious that the pages from the inner gate who did night duty at the
point nearest to the Garden should be subjected to careful questioning. As a result of
these orders there was a general hubbub in the Garden throughout all the rest of
that night: lanterns and torches bobbing about and people scurrying to and fro in all
directions. At four o’clock in the morning the stewards and stewardesses were
summoned from their quarters and ordered to investigate all those servants of either
sex who had been on night duty in the mansion.
     When Grandmother Jia learned that Bao-yu was suffering from shock, she
wanted to know why. The others were obliged to tell her.
     ‘I didn’t expect a thing like this to happen,’ she said. ‘It would be bad enough if
the people who are supposed to be keeping us safe at night were merely being
careless. What worries me is the thought that some of them may be criminals
themselves!’
     Lady Xing and You-shi had not long since arrived for their morning duty, and Li
Wan, Xi-feng and the girls were also there in attendance. None of them dared say
anything. In the end it was Tan-chun who, smiling, stepped forwards and broke the
silence.

       ‘It’s because Cousin Feng hasn’t been very well during these last few months,’
she said. ‘The servants in the Garden have got much more careless than they used to
be. At first it was only once in a while: three or four doing night duty on the same
shift getting together for a little game of dice or cards to keep themselves awake. But
gradually they became more reckless, until now there are regular little card-schools
with their own bankers and forty or fifty strings of cash changing hands at a sitting. A
fortnight ago it even reached a point where a fight broke out over the cards.’
       ‘If you knew this at the time, why didn’t you tell anyone?’ said Grandmother Jia
with some asperity.
       ‘I didn’t tell Mother because I knew she was busy and not feeling very well,’ said
Tan-chun. ‘I did tell sister-in-law though, and the stewardesses and the women were
given several warnings. As a matter of fact, I think they have been a bit more careful
since then.’
       ‘You’re only a child,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You don’t know how serious this is.
You think that gambling is a trifling matter and that the only thing to be feared from
it is an occasional quarrel. But where there is gambling, there is probably drinking as
well; and if there is drinking, probably gates are being left unlocked so that people
can slip out to buy things; and when that happens, before you know where you are
they will be letting thieves in - the easiest thing in the world when it is dark and there
are so few people about. And then - Heaven help us! - with only you girls living there
and the maids and women who wait on you - some of them no better than they
should be, I dare say - anything could happen. There are things worse than burglary,
the mere suspicion of which could have the direst consequences for all of you. No,
this is not a matter to be dismissed so airily!’
      After such a snub, Tan-chun could only sit down again in silence.
      Xi-feng was still far from well and her usual ebullience was very much in
abeyance, but she managed to summon up some energy when she saw how
seriously the old lady was displeased. She made a point of observing how
unfortunate it was that such things ‘had to happen’ when she was ill, then, sending
for Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife and three of the other principal stewardesses, she subjected
them to a thorough dressing-down in Grandmother Jia’s and everyone else’s
presence. When Xi-feng had finished with them, Grandmother Jia ordered them to
find out who the chief organizers were and all the others who had been taking part in
the gambling. She em?powered them to offer rewards for information and to punish
those who withheld it.
     Seeing Grandmother Jia so angry, the stewardesses dared not attempt to cover
up for their own kinswomen and friends, of whom there were several among the
older women of the watch. Going at once into the Garden, they summoned all the
women together and proceeded to grill them, one by one, without distinction of
persons. They met at first with a certain amount of resistance, but in the end, as will
almost invariably happen when the questioning is sufficiently patient and persistent,
the waters subsided and the rocks began to appear. By the time they had finished
their interrogations it was established that there were three principal organizers,
eight subsidiary ones, and a score or more gamblers who had availed themselves of
their services. All of these were taken at once to Grandmother Jia’s place, and were
soon to be observed kneeling down in rows in her courtyard, knocking their heads
upon the pavement and begging for mercy.
     Grandmother Jia began by asking for the names of the three principal organizers
and the amounts of money in their ‘banks’. Of the three it turned out that one was a
cousin on the mother’s side of Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, one a younger sister of Cook Liu,
and the other one Ying-chun’s nurse. The other eight organizers, who had operated
on a smaller scale, were also named, but their identities need not concern us.
Grandmother Jia ordered all the dice and playing-cards to be collected together and
burnt. The money from the banks she ordered to be confiscated and divided up
among the other servants. She sentenced the principal offenders to receive forty
strokes of the heavy bamboo, to be dismissed, and never to be employed by the
family again. The others were to receive twenty strokes, lose three months’ pay, and
in future be employed in cleaning out the latrines. After passing these sentences, she
formally reprimanded Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife for having permitted such things to happen.
      Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, let down by her own relation and twice rebuked in public,
was not the only person present to feel humiliated. Ying-chun, sitting among the
other cousins next to Grandmother Jia, felt equally humiliated when it was revealed
that her own nurse was one of the principal offenders. Dai-yu, Bao-chai and Tan-chun
felt sorry for her and rose to intercede for the old woman.
      ‘Couldn’t you, for Ying-chun’s sake, let her off this once?’ they pleaded. ‘She
isn’t an habitual gambler. It’s just that once in a while she gets carried away.
      ‘You none of you know what you are talking about,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘These old nannies are all the same. They think that because they suckled you when
you were babies it entitles them to special treatment now. They’re worse trouble
than all the other servants put together, because whenever they have done wrong
they think they can always get you to cover up for them. I know. I have had a lot of
experience of these people. I need to make an example of one of them, and this one
will do very well. You leave this to me. I know what I am doing.’
      The three girls were obliged to let the matter drop.
      Soon it was time for the old lady’s siesta and all of those present withdrew. But
because they knew she was angry, they did not all go back to their own apartments.
Some of them waited around so as to be on hand when she had finished resting.
You-shi called in at Xi-feng’s place to chat, but finding Xi-feng too much out of sorts
for conversation, went into the Garden to talk to Li Wan and the girls. Lady Xing, too,
after sitting for a while at Lady Wang’s place, went off to take a walk in the Garden.
She had got no farther than the Garden gate, however, when one of the junior maids
from Grandmother Jia’s apartment, a girl called Simple, almost bumped into her. The
girl was walking along chuckling delightedly to herself, intent on some brightly
coloured object. Because she was so intent on what she was holding, she had not
seen Lady Xing coming towards her and only looked up and checked herself when
she was almost upon her.
‘Well now, Simple,’ said Lady Xing, ‘you seem very pleased with yourself. What
marvellous thing have you got there? Let me have a look.’
Simple, just turned fourteen, had only recently been selected to help with the rough
work in Grandmother Jia’s apartment. She had a hefty body, a broad face and an
enormous pair of feet. A willing and effective worker in the heavier sort of jobs
requiring no intelligence, she was nevertheless so stupid as to be almost half-witted
and as ignorant and innocent almost as the day she was born. Much of what she said
was uninten?tionally amusing. Grandmother Jia was endlessly diverted by her and
always allowed her mistakes to go unreproved. It was she who had given her the
name ‘Simple’. When Simple had no work to do, she would often go into the Garden
to play. On this occasion she had gone into the Garden to look for crickets behind the
rocks of the artificial mountain just inside the gate, and in doing so, had come upon a
beautifully embroidered purse. The design embroidered on it consisted not of the
usual birds and flowers, but on one side of a pair of naked human figures locked
together in an embrace and on the other of some writing. Simple was too innocent
to under?stand what the naked couple were up to. After giving the matter some
thought, she had decided that they must be either two demons fighting or two
people wrestling, but could not make up her mind which of these was the correct
interpretation. She was on her way, chuckling delightedly over her find, to ask
Grandmother Jia’s opinion on the matter when she nearly ran into Lady Xing.
‘I think you’ve said the right word, Your Ladyship,’ said Simple. ‘It is a marvellous
thing. You just look!’
Lady Xing took the proffered bag. She examined the picture on it with a start.
‘Where did you find this?’ she asked, seizing Simple roughly by the arm.
‘I found it behind the rocks,’ said Simple, ‘when I was looking for crickets.’
‘Don’t tell anyone else about this,’ said Lady Xing. ‘This is a bad thing, Simple. If you
weren’t such a simpleton, they would give you a beating just for touching it. Don’t
ever say a word about it to anyone else!’
Simple turned pale with fright.
‘No, no, I won’t.’
She made Lady Xing a kotow and went off, round-eyed, with her mouth gaping
foolishly open.
Lady Xing looked around her. There were only maids in sight, and she obviously could
not give the embroidered purse to one of them, so she stuffed it up her sleeve. She
was very puzzled to think where it could have come from; but no trace of what she
felt was allowed to show itself on her face as she made her way through the Garden
towards Ying-chun’s apartment.
Ying-chun was still brooding disconsolately over her nurse’s guilt when her mother’s
arrival was announced. She hurried out to welcome her. As soon as Lady Xing was
seated and had been given tea, she began laying into her.
‘You’re not a child now. If you knew your nurse was doing this sort of thing, for
Heaven’s sake why couldn’t you have spoken to her about it? Other people’s nurses
don’t seem to get into trouble, why does it have to be yours? I don’t understand
you!’
Ying-chun hung her head and fiddled with her sash. It was some time before she
answered.
‘I did speak to her about it, on two occasions, but she wouldn’t listen to me. What
could I do? She’s my nurse. She’s supposed to tell me what to do, not the other way
round.’
‘Rubbish!’ said Lady Xing. ‘She’s entitled to tell you off if you’ve done something
wrong, but in a case like this where she was the guilty one, it was up to you to
behave towards her like a mistress. Then, if she still wouldn’t obey you, you ought to
have come and told me. As it is, you have let things slide until everyone knows about
it and all the rest of us are involved in the disgrace. I just don’t know what you think
you are at. Incidentally, if she was banker to a card-school, she must have had to get
money from somewhere to start it with. I shouldn’t be a bit surprised to find that
she’d talked you into lending her clothes or jewellery that she could pawn in order to
raise her capital. You’re such a soft, flabby creature, you’d be just as likely as not to
lend them to her. Well all I can say is, if she has and you don’t get them back from her,
it’s no good coming to me for the money, for I’ve none to give you; so what you will
do when festival time comes and you need your things I can’t imagine.’
Ying-chun continued to hang her head and say nothing. Lady Xing found her
unresponsiveness provoking.
‘Your mother was one of Sir She’s chamber-wives,’ she said, ‘and your Cousin Tan’s
mother was a chamber-wife as well, so you and she had the same sort of start in life.
As a matter of fact your mother was ten times better than that Zhao woman, so you
ought by rights to be better than your Cousin Tan. But you’re not. You’re not her
equal in any single respect. I don’t know, I’d have been better off without any
children at all. Those I have only make me look ridiculous.’
‘Mrs Lian is here,’ one of the servants announced.
‘Huh!’ said Lady Xing scornfully; and then again, ‘Huh!’
‘Tell her to go back home and take care of her illness,’ she said to the waiting
servant. ‘Tell her I have no need of her services.’
As that servant went out, another one, who had been sent to Grandmother Jia’s
place to act as a look-out, came in to report that the old lady was now awake. Lady
Xing got up to go. Ying-chun saw her out as far as the courtyard gate.
‘There you are!’ said Tangerine when Ying-chun got back. ‘When I told you the
other day that that pearl-and-gold phoenix had disappeared, you wouldn’t even ask
about it. I told you that Nannie had probably nicked it to pawn, but you wouldn’t
believe me. You said, “I expect Chess is looking after it.” Well, I asked Chess, because
although she is in, she is still perfectly clear in her mind, and she said, “No, I haven’t
touched it. It ought still to be in the casket on the bookshelf, ready for wearing at the
Mid-Autumn festival.” Now why don’t you send someone to Nannie right away and
ask her what she’s done with it?’
‘There’s no need to ask,’ said Ying-chun. ‘It’s perfectly obvious that she took it
because she was temporarily out of cash and needed the money from it to tide her
over. She quietly removed it when no one was looking, and I assumed that after a
few days had gone by, when she was in funds again, she would redeem it and quietly
slip it back again. I expect she forgot. In any case, there’s not much point in asking
her after what has happened today.’
‘She never forgot!’ said Tangerine. ‘She knew from past experience that you’d
never do anything, that’s why she didn’t put it back. I think I know what to do,
though. I’ll go and tell Mrs Lian about it, and either she’ll ask Nannie about it herself,
or better still, she’ll send someone with a few strings of cash round to the pawnshop
and get it back for you straight away.’
‘You’ll do no such thing!’ said Ying-chun. ‘Much better leave well alone. I’d rather
do without the thing than stir up a lot more trouble.’
‘Why are you so feeble?’ said Tangerine exasperatedly. ‘All this “saving trouble”!
One of these days they’ll carry you off with the loot! I’m going, anyway.’
She began to do so. Ying-chun said nothing and made no attempt to prevent her.
Unknown to them both, however, Zhu-er’s wife - the daughter-in-law of the old nurse
they were talking about - had all this time been listening outside the door. She had
come intending to ask Ying-chun to put in a plea for her mother-in-law, but held back
when she heard Ying-chun and Tangerine discussing the pearl-and-gold phoenix.
Because Ying-chun was so weak and unassertive, Zhu-er’s wife would not normally
have regarded the discovery by her of one of her mother-in-law’s depredations as a
matter of very much consequence; but when she heard Tangerine insisting that
Xi-feng should be informed, she could see that unless something were done to
prevent this, the consequences could be very serious indeed. At this point, therefore,
she hurried in to try and stop her.
‘Now, now, Miss Tangerine,’ she said, smiling rather unnaturally, ‘don’t go making
trouble! Our old missus was a bit silly about that pearl-and-gold phoenix, I will admit.
She’d lost a bit at the cards and couldn’t recoup, so she took it as a loan. Naturally
she never expected that all this trouble would break out before she’d had a chance to
put it back. But be that as it may, it’s the mistress’s property, and we’ve no intention
of forgetting about it. Sooner or later we fully intend to redeem it for her. I’d hardly
be here now if we didn’t, would I? I’ve come to ask the mistress, for the sake of the
milk she sucked from her as a baby, to go to Her Old Ladyship and plead with her for
our old missus.’
‘My dear good woman,’ said Ying-chun, ‘if that is what you are hoping for, then the
sooner you disabuse yourself of that hope the better. I am not going to plead for your
mother?in-law. You can wait from now until this time next year if you like, but I will
still not do it. Miss Bao and Miss Lin and the others have tried already and Her Old
Ladyship refused to listen to them. She’s even less likely to listen to me on my own. I
have already put up with enough humiliation for one day; I have no intention of
going to look for more.’
‘Whether or not you return that phoenix is one thing and whether or not the
mistress goes to plead for your mother-in-law is another,’ said Tangerine. ‘Don’t try to
confuse the issue. I hope you’re not suggesting that if the mistress doesn’t do what
you ask for your mother-in-law, you won’t redeem the phoenix? I think you ought to
redeem the phoenix first and start talking about that other matter after you have
brought it back.’
Ying-chun’s refusal and Tangerine’s sharp rebuke put Zhu?-er’s wife out of
countenance and left her momentarily at a loss for words, but she quickly found her
tongue again and, as if openly contemptuous of Ying-chun’s easy-going nature, began
taking noisy issue with Tangerine in her mistress’s presence.
‘Don’t be so high and mighty, Miss Tangerine! If you look around at the other
apartments in this household, you’ll find that there isn’t a single one in which the
nannies don’t take some advantage of their position to get a few perks. I don’t see
why only in our case you should be so pernickety. If you are a bit light-fingered, of
course, that’s another matter! Ever since Miss Xing came to live with us, Lady Xing
has insisted on a tad a month being stopped out of her allowance to help pay for her
mother. That means that though we now have two mistresses here in the place of
one - with all the extra expenses that that entails - we are having to manage on less
money a month instead of more. It’s hardly surprising that the mistresses are always
running short. And when they do, who is it that steps in and pays? We do. One way
and another, we must have paid out at least thirty taels by now, and from what I can
see, it was money down the drain.’
‘Thirty taels?’ said Tangerine indignantly. ‘How do you make that out? Just tell me
one or two of the things the mistress is supposed to have asked you for.’
Ying-chun had been made uneasy by the open reference to her mother’s meanness.
‘Now that’s enough!’ she told the woman. ‘If you can’t give the phoenix back, you
can’t. There’s no need to go dragging all these other matters into it and shouting
them around for everyone else to hear. I don’t want the thing, anyway. If mother asks
me about it, I shall tell her I’ve lost it. At least you won’t have anything to worry
about, so you might just as well go away and rest. What’s the point of making all this
fuss?’
She told Tangerine to pour her some tea. Tangerine was both angry and alarmed.
It’s all very well for you to take that way out, miss, but what about us? Not content
with depriving you of your gold phoenix, this woman is now pretending that you’ve
been spending their money and proposing to write off the phoenix to offset what
they’re supposed to have given you. If Lady Xing hears that and asks how you came
to be spending so much, it’s we servants who will take the blame. It isn’t fair!’
She burst into tears. Chess, who, as she lay ill in bed, had been listening with growing
impatience to what the others were saying, could now contain herself no longer.
Getting out of bed, she dragged herself over to take Tangerine’s part in the argument.
Ying-chun, finding that her single attempt at ending it had failed, picked up a volume
of Tai-shang’s Heavenly Rewards and Punishments and began to read.
While Zhu-er’s wife and the two maids were still at it hammer and tongs, Bao-chai,
Dai-yu, Bao-qin and Tan-chun arrived. Concerned that Ying-chun might still be feeling
distressed about her nurse, they had met together by prearrangement and come
over to try and cheer her up. Sounds of the wrangling going on inside were distinctly
audible as they entered her courtyard. Tan-chun walked over and, peeping through
the window, saw Ying-chun half-reclining on the day-bed reading a book, oblivious to
the noisy argu?ment that was going on only a few feet away from her. She laughed.
Just at that moment two junior maids raised the portiere for the visitors and
announced their arrival.
At once Ying-chun put her book down and rose to welcome them. The sight of these
newcomers - particularly as Tan-chun was one of them - caused the woman to stop of
her own accord and she took the opportunity of slipping quietly outside.
‘Who was that talking in here just now?’ said Tan-chun as she took a seat. ‘It
sounded as if someone was having an argument.’
‘Oh, nothing,’ said Ying-chun, pleasantly. ‘Probably only the servants making their
usual fuss about nothing. Certainly not anything worth inquiring about.’
‘I’m sure I heard something about a “golden phoenix” just now,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I
distinctly heard someone say, “When she’s short of money, she always asks us
servants for some.” When who’s short of money? Not you, Ying, surely? You don’t ask
the servants for money, do you?’
‘You’re absolutely right, miss, she most certainly does not,’ said Chess and
Tangerine indignantly.
Tan-chun smiled.
‘Well, Ying, if it wasn’t you the woman I heard was talking about, perhaps it was me?
You’d better call her inside again and let me ask her.’
‘Now you’re being ridiculous,’ said Ying-chun, laughing. ‘Why be like this? It has
absolutely nothing to do with you.’
‘There you are wrong,’ said Tan-chun. ‘You and I are in the same boat. Our
circumstances are very similar. What she says affects me as much as it does you. It
would be just the same if you were to hear someone at my place complaining about
me. You would feel almost as though you were being criticized yourself. As mistresses,
you and I are above talking to servants about the petty cash. We may ask them for
things sometimes, as and when we require them, but that is another matter. Tell me,
though: how did a “pearl-and-gold phoenix” come to be mixed up in this discussion?’
Zhu-er’s wife, terrified lest Tangerine should seize this opportunity to denounce her,
came rushing in at this point and tried to put Tan-chun off the scent with her own
ex?tremely garbled account of what had happened. But Tan-chun showed that she
had a better understanding of the case than the woman supposed.
‘I think you are being very stupid,’ she said smilingly. ‘What you ought to do, now
that your mother-in-law has already got herself into trouble, is to go to Mrs Lian
before the money confiscated has been divided up and ask if you can have some of it
back to redeem this jewellery with. Ideally, of course, it would have been better if
you could have redeemed it before all this trouble broke out and saved yourselves a
bit of face. But now that you have no face left to save, you’d much better make a
clean breast of it and get the money. After all, your mother-in-law has already been
found guilty. However many crimes she’s committed, they can only cut her head off
once. You take my advice. Go round to Mrs Lian’s place as soon as possible and make
a clean breast of it. Standing around here shouting is not going to get you anywhere!’
The woman was forced to admit that Tan-chun’s reading of the situation was correct.
But she was too scared to go to Xi-feng and confess.
‘If I hadn’t heard you talking about this, it would have been none of my business,’
said Tan-chun. ‘But now that I have heard, I think you had better let me take over and
do the explaining for you.’
Unknown to the others, Tan-chun had tipped Scribe the wink a minute or two
previously and Scribe had slipped outside to summon help. It was no surprise to
Tan-chun, therefore, that Patience should have walked in just as she was saying this;
but to the others her appearance at that moment was little short of miraculous.
Bao-qin clapped her hands delightedly.
‘I always knew Cousin Tan was a witch. Now here comes her familiar spirit!’
‘It’s not witchcraft, it’s generalship,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Don’t you remember what it says
in The Art of War?
A shy maiden in defence, but swift as a hare in the attack.
In good generalship surprise is of the essence.’
A look from Bao-chai caused the two girls to drop their bantering and talk of
something else while Tan-chun addressed herself to the new arrival.
‘Is your mistress any better yet?’ she asked Patience. ‘She seems to have
completely lost her grip on things since she had this illness. It’s very unfortunate for
people like me who have to put up with the consequences.
‘Oh?’ said Patience in some surprise. ‘Has someone been giving you trouble, miss?
If you will let me know what I can do, I am at your disposal.’
Zhu-er’s wife was now in a panic. She bounded up to Patience and was all over her
before Tan-chun could get a word in.
‘Sit down while I tell you, Miss Patience. I can explain it all.’
Patience gave her a long, hard look.
‘Miss Tan and I are talking. What right have you to come butting in like this? If you
had any manners at all, you wouldn’t even be in this room, you’d be waiting
respectfully outside. Whoever heard of an outside servant going into one of the
young mistresses’ apartments without being asked?’
‘Manners?’ said Tangerine. ‘You won’t find many around here. People barge in and
out of this apartment as they please.’
‘It’s your fault then if they do,’ said Patience sharply. ‘If Miss Ying is too gentle to do
so, you ought to throw them out yourselves and then go and report them to Her
Ladyship.’
Zhu-er’s wife reddened at Patience’s rebuke and took herself outside.
‘Now I can answer your question,’ Tan-chun said to Patience. ‘This is not actually
my affair. If it were, perhaps I shouldn’t have minded quite so much. What happened
is that this woman’s mother-in-law, trading on the fact that she used to be Miss Ying’s
wet-nurse when she was a baby and taking advantage of Miss Ying’s easy-going
nature, took some of her jewellery without telling her in order to raise money for her
gambling. As if that wasn’t enough, this woman had the gall to pretend that Miss
Ying owed them money in order that she could blackmail her into interceding for her
mother-in-law. I found her and these two maids shouting at each other in Miss Ying’s
bedroom while Miss Ying sat by helpless. Now that you are here, I should like to ask
you this question. Is this woman really so thick-witted that she doesn’t know any
better, or has someone else put her up to this? I mean, is there some plan to
undermine Miss Ying first and then, when she is safely out of the way, to get to work
on me and on Miss Xi?’
‘Oh miss!’ said Patience, endeavouring to treat the question as a joke, ‘how could
you? Mrs Lian is not as bad as that!’
‘I’m sure I don’t know,’ said Tan-chun coldly. ‘You know the saying: “Like grieves for
like; for when the lips are gone, the teeth will be cold.” When I saw what was
happening to Miss Ying, I couldn’t help feeling nervous.’
Patience turned to Ying-chun questioningly.
‘It would be easy enough to deal with this matter if it weren’t that this woman is
the wife of your foster-brother. It’s really up to you, miss.’
Ying-chun had all this time been sitting shoulder to shoulder with Bao-chai, reading
one of the stories in Rewards-and-Punishments. She had not even heard what
Tan-chun had been saying and had only the haziest idea what was required of her
when she suddenly found herself being addressed. She smiled back, however, and
did her best to oblige.
‘Don’t ask me!’ she said. ‘There’s absolutely nothing that I can do about it. If they
will go getting themselves into trouble, they must face the consequences. All I can
say is that I can’t do anything to get their punishment reduced and I won’t do
anything to increase it. As for that object they took from me without telling me, if
they do bring it back I shall be happy to receive it; if they don’t bring it back I shall
not ask them for it. If either of Their Ladyships should ask me about it, I shall keep
the facts hidden from them if I can do so honourably, in which case these people may
consider themselves lucky; but if I can’t, I shall just have to tell them the truth. It is
quite out of the question that I should deliberately deceive Their Ladyships in order
to cover up for them. You say I am too easy-going and indecisive: if you know of a
better way of dealing with this matter that is both fool-proof and will not upset Their
Ladyships, by all means go ahead with it; I shall certainly not interfere.’
The others were much amused by this answer.
‘Ying-chun makes me think of that monk who went on discussing theological
matters while wolves and tigers prowled outside in his courtyard,’ said Dai-yu
laughing. ‘How on earth would she have controlled a great household like ours if she
had been a man?’
‘That’s begging the question,’ said Ying-chun, smiling. ‘There are plenty of men who
live off the fat of the land but who, in a crisis, are no better at dealing with things
than I. Anyway, Tai-shang says that of all works of merit helping people when they
are in trouble is the greatest. I may not be able to help anyone, but at least I am not
going out of my way to make things worse for them. What is the point of gratuitously
making enemies or exerting oneself for ends from which no one will benefit?’
Before she had finished, another visitor was heard arriving in the courtyard. Who this
was will be revealed in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 74

Lady Wang authorizes a raid
on Prospect Garden
And Jia Xi-chun breaks off relations
with Ning-guo House



Patience was greatly amused by the tone of Ying-chun’s answer to her inquiry.
Ying-chun’s further self-justification in reply to Dai-yu’s comment was cut short by
the arrival of another visitor. It was at this point that we concluded the last chapter.
The visitor was Bao-yu. When it was known that one of the chief organizers of the
gambling was Cook Liu’s younger sister, Cook Liu’s enemies in the Garden regarded
this as a good opportunity for making another attempt to oust her from her kitchen.
Going in a body to Xi-feng, they accused her of being in partnership with her sister
and receiving equal shares of her takings, and they demanded that Xi-feng should
take appropriate action to punish her. Cook Liu, when she heard this, was at first
panic-stricken; then, remembering her friends at Green Delights, she hurried over
there, taking great care that nobody saw her on the way, and begged Skybright and
Aventurin to tell Bao-yu what had happened. It occurred to Bao-yu, when they told
him, that as Ying-chun’s nurse was in trouble for the same offence, it would be more
effective to join forces with Ying-chun in pleading for clemency than to go along on
his own and plead only for Cook Liu. It was in order to discuss this matter that he had
come to see Ying-chun. Unfortunately, when he arrived, he found that she was not
alone.
‘Are you better now?’ the others asked him. (They supposed that he was still
suffering from shock.) ‘What have you come for?’
He could not state the real purpose of his visit in front of so many people and merely
told them that he had come ‘to see how Ying-chun was getting on’. The others
believed him, and a desultory conversation followed about nothing in particular.
Patience now went off to deal with the pearl-and-gold phoenix. Zhu-er’s wife
followed at her elbow, begging to be let off.
‘For charity’s sake, don’t tell her, miss! I promise you faithfully, that phoenix will be
redeemed.’
‘So you keep saying,’ said Patience, drily. ‘What a pity you couldn’t have redeemed
it a bit sooner and saved yourself this trouble! You want to wriggle out of this
somehow without telling her, don’t you? Well, I can’t say that I am very keen on
informing against you, myself. I’ll tell you what: you get that thing back as quickly as
possible and hand it over to me, and I won’t say anything about it to my mistress.’
Zhu-er’s wife was so relieved that she went down on her knees to thank her.
‘You carry on now with whatever you are doing, miss. I’ll have it ready for you by
this evening. I’ll bring it to show you as soon as I’ve redeemed it, and then I’ll take it
back to Miss Ying’s. How will that be?’
‘All right,’ said Patience. ‘But if you don’t turn up with it this evening, you will have
only yourself to blame for what happens.’
The two young women then went their separate ways.
‘Well?’ said Xi-feng, when Patience got back to her apartment. ‘What did Miss Tan
want you for?’
‘She was worried that you might have been fretting over this gambling business,’
said Patience, smiling. ‘She asked me how you’d been eating this last day or two.’
‘That’s very kind of her,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Oh, there’s more trouble, by the way. Some
of them have just been here accusing Cook Liu of being mixed up in the gambling
business with her sister. They’re saying, in fact, that she was the real or?ganizer.
However, remembering how insistent you always are that I should let well alone and
only think of my health, I took no action. Last time I ignored your advice and had
some?one punished, I not only offended Lady Xing but also ended up by making
myself ill. So this time I knew better. They can do as they please, I don’t care.
Someone else can do the worrying. I have nearly destroyed myself by worrying and
the only result of it is that everyone hates me. Very well. Now all I am going to think
about is getting better. And when I am better, I am going to turn myself into a Mr
Yes-yes. No matter what frightful things the others get up to, I shall just say “Yes, yes”
when I hear about them. “Yes, yes,” I shall say, and not give them a single other
thought!’
‘If only you would be like that,’ said Patience smiling, ‘what a blessing it would be
for us all!’
At that moment Jia Lian came in, sighing and striking his hands together with
vexation.
‘More trouble! When I borrowed that stuff from Faithful the other day to pawn,
how could Mother have got to hear about it? She had me over there just now and
asked me to borrow two hundred taels for her. She said she wanted it for the
Mid-Autumn festival. I said I didn’t know who I could borrow two hundred taels from
at the moment. “If you can’t borrow the money, you can easily find something to
raise it on,” she said. “Don’t always make excuses. Don’t know who to borrow it from,
indeed! You could spirit all those things out of Lady Jia’s room when you chose to, yet
now you make difficulties about raising a paltry two hundred taels for me! You’re
lucky I haven’t told anyone what you’ve been up to.” I’m certain Mother isn’t really
short of money. This is sheer, gratuitous trouble-making on her part.’
‘There were no outsiders here on that occasion,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I wonder how the
news could have leaked out.’
Patience, who had been listening to their conversation, tried hard to remember who
had been present. After some moments it came back to her.
‘I know. There was no one else here that day while you were talking to Faithful, but
in the evening, when she sent the stuff round, that mother of Simple’s who works for
Her Old Ladyship called in with some laundry and afterwards sat quite a long while
talking in the kitchen. If she saw that great trunk there, it would have been only
natural to ask what was inside it, and the maids might well have told her, without
realizing that they were not supposed to. I wouldn’t be at all surprised if that’s how it
got about.’
She called some of the junior maids in to question them.
‘Which of you told Simple’s mother the other day what was in that trunk?’
The maids knelt down in terror and swore by the most sacred oaths that they had
said nothing.
‘We’re always most careful not to say too much to anyone. When people ask us
anything, we always say that we don’t know. We’d certainly never have told her
about that!’
Xi-feng considered the probabilities.
‘Somehow I don’t think they would have told her. At all events, there is no point in
harrving them about it now. We shall just have to put that question behind us. The
important thing now is to make sure that Mother gets what she wants. I’d rather we
went short ourselves than risk her making another lot of trouble.’ She turned to
Patience. ‘Take some of my gold things again and get us another two hundred taels. -
As soon as she has the money ready, you can take it to Mother immediately, and that
should be the end of the matter,’ she told Jia Lian.
‘Might as well raise four hundred taels while you are about it,’ said Jia Lian. ‘We
could do with another two hundred ourselves.’
‘I don’t see that at all,’ said Xi-feng. ‘We don’t really need two hundred taels
ourselves. And in any case, if we raise so much now, where is the money coming from
later for getting the things out of pawn?’
Patience fetched the now familiar gold necklaces and told Brightie’s wife to take
them to the pawnshop. Soon afterwards Brightie’s wife was back again with the cash
and Jia Lian went in person to hand it over to his mother.
While Jia Lian was taking the money to Lady Xing, Xi-feng and Patience continued to
ask themselves who could have leaked the information about the surreptitious
removal of Grandmother Jia’s valuables.
‘It’s too bad!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Poor Faithful will be in trouble over this, and all because
of us.’
While they were still wondering who it could have been, Lady Wang was announced.
This was a surprise, for Xi-feng could think of no reason why she should be visiting
them. She and Patience hurried out to greet her.
Lady Wang had only one maid, a trusted junior, in attendance. There was an angry
expression on her face and she walked swiftly through the house into the inner room
and sat down grimly on the kang, all without uttering a word. Xi-feng, concealing her
apprehension behind a smile, hurriedly served her with tea.
‘It’s an unusual honour to have you here, Aunt.’
‘Patience, leave the room!’ Lady Wang commanded.
‘Yes’m,’ said Patience, wondering what on earth could be the matter, and hurried
out, taking all the other maids with her. She stood by the outer door until they were
all outside, then closed it after her and sat down at the top of the steps to prevent
anyone going in.
As Xi-feng, now thoroughly alarmed, watched her aunt and wondered why she had
come, Lady Wang, who appeared to be on the point of weeping, drew an
embroidered pouch from her sleeve and threw it on the kang.
‘Look at that!’
Xi-feng hastily picked it up and found herself, to her great surprise, looking at a lewd
picture, beautifully embroidered in silks.
‘Where did you get it from?’ she asked.
The tears that had collected in Lady Wang’s eyes poured down her cheeks now and
the voice in which she answered was choked and trembling.
‘Where did I get it from? I sit all day at the bottom of a well. As you seemed such a
conscientious young woman, I thought I could leave things to you and enjoy some
leisure, but it seems that you are no better at managing than I. Fancy leaving a thing
like that in the Garden - on a rockery, too, in broad daylight, where everyone could
see it! It was picked up by one of Grandmother’s maids. If your mother-in-law hadn’t
fortunately spotted the girl carrying it, it would have gone straight to Grandmother. I
think it’s for you to tell me how it came to be dropped there.’
It was Xi-feng’s turn to look angry.
‘How do you know it’s mine?’
Lady Wang sighed and shed a few more tears.
‘How can you ask me that? Who in this household apart from you and Lian could a
thing like this belong to? The old women would have no use for a thing like this and
none of the girls would know where to get one from. Obviously that wretched,
worthless Lian must have got hold of it from somewhere; and you, treating it, I
suppose, as a great joke, were only too happy to receive it from him. I know that
young couples do go in for this sort of thing; why try to deny it? But the young
people in the Garden are still innocent. Suppose one of their maids had picked it up
and shown it to them? It doesn’t bear thinking of. Or suppose a maid had picked it up
and told someone from outside that she had found it in the Garden? What sort of
reputation would that leave our family with? It would be better to die than that such
a thing should happen.’
A mixture of shame and exasperation caused the blood to rush into Xi-feng’s face.
She fell on her knees beside the kang. There were tears in her own eyes when she
answered, but they were tears of anger.
‘What you say is no doubt very reasonable, Aunt, and I have no wish to argue with
you, but I really don’t own anything like this and I really must ask you to reconsider
one or two of the things you have said. First of all, take another look at this bag. It
wasn’t made here. One can see at a glance that it is a poor commercial imitation of
“palace” embroidery. Even the tassels are the kind you would buy outside. I may be
young and frivolous, but I’d hardly be likely to want a trashy thing like this. Secondly,
this isn’t the sort of thing one would carry around with one. Even if it were mine, I
should keep it hidden somewhere in a secret place, not walk around with it on my
person, particularly if I were going into the Garden. The girls and I are always holding
each other and pulling each other about, so that if I were wearing a thing like this, it
would very quickly get noticed, and what should I feel like then, if one of the girls or
one of the maids were to look at it? Thirdly, I may be the only young married woman
with a husband in the family, but there are plenty of even younger married women
among the servants who are often in and out of the Garden. How can you be so sure
that it wasn’t one of them who dropped this bag? Then there are those younger
concubines of Sir She’s, like Carmine and Azure. Mother often takes one or two of
them with her when she goes into the Garden. They would be even more likely to
own a thing like this. And Zhen’s wife herself isn’t all that old, not to mention Lovey
and Dove, whom she frequently takes with her when she goes there. How do you
know it doesn’t belong to one of them? And in any case, there are so many maids in
the Garden, how can you be so sure that all of them are pure? There may be one or
two of the older ones who are not so innocent. One of them could have slipped out
on some pretext or other when no one was looking to flirt with the pages on the
inner gate and got it from one of them. It’s perfectly possible. But I can assure you
that I have never possessed a thing like this, and I know that Patience hasn’t either.
So I really must ask you to reconsider.’
Lady Wang was somewhat overwhelmed by this torrent of words, but had to admit
their reasonableness.
‘You can get up,’ she said with a sigh. ‘It was wrong of me to accuse you. I ought to
have known that a young woman of your breeding would not be guilty of such
unseemliness. I am afraid I was overwrought and allowed anger to get the better of
me. But what am I to do? Your mother-in-law saw fit to send this thing round to me
by a messenger. I was terribly upset when I unwrapped it and saw what it was.’
‘The first thing to do is to try not to be so upset,’ said Xi-feng. ‘If the servants
become aware that something is wrong, the chances of Grandmother getting to hear
about it will be much greater. If we can remain cool and carry out our investigations
in secret, we are much more likely to get at the truth, and even if we don’t, no one
outside is going to be any the wiser. We should pick four or five of our most trusted
servants to do the investigating - people like Zhou Rui’s wife and Brightie’s wife who
can be relied upon not to talk - and send them into the Garden as replacements of
the women who have been dismissed. The pretext for their investigations can be that
there are various things connected with the gambling that still remain to be cleared
up. The other thing we must do something about is the number of the maids. There
are far too many of them. As they get older, they begin to get grown-up ideas, and
one can never be quite sure that they may not get up to some mischief. It’s no good
waiting until something has actually happened before doing any?thing, because then
it will already be too late; on the other hand to begin large-scale dismissals straight
away would be very distressing for the girls and probably for us as well. It would be
better to wait until each maid either reaches a certain age or shows signs of growing
insubordinate, and then use the first slip she makes as grounds for dismissing her and
marrying her to one of the boys. In that way we can both avoid having trouble and at
the same time make a considerable reduction in our expenses.’
Lady Wang sighed.
‘You are of course right. But in fairness to our girls I think it must be said that they
are already making do with the absolute minimum of service. Not one of them has
more than two or three maids who are the least bit of use. The others are like a pack
of mischievous children. And I am not the only one who would feel unhappy about
cutting down the numbers; I think it highly probable that Grandmother, too, would
object. After all, things may be a bit difficult at present, but we can’t be all that poor.
I wouldn’t lay claim to any great riches, but I think I may perhaps be a little bit better
off than the rest of you. So if there is any talk of economy, I’d rather do without
my?self than see the girls suffer. The important thing now is to call in Zhou Rui’s wife
and one or two of our other women and get them to begin these secret
investigations for us as quickly as possible.’
Xi-feng at once called Patience in and explained what was wanted. Patience went out
again and within a short time had assembled five of Lady Wang’s and Xi-feng’s most
trusted retainers: Zhou Rui’s wife, Wu Xing’s wife and Zheng Hua’s wife from among
Lady Wang’s servants and Brightie’s wife and Happy’s wife from among Xi-feng’s.
Lady Wang thought they might not be enough for the sort of detailed investigation
she had in mind. While she was wondering who else to get, Wang Shan-bao’s wife
walked in.
Wang Shan-bao’s wife, like Goody Fei, was one of the servants who had been with
Lady Xing since her childhood and accompanied her when she came to the Jia
household as a bride. It was she, in fact, who had brought the embroidered bag to
Lady Wang, and she had trailed along to Xi-feng’s place out of curiosity, to see what
she would do about the discovery. Lady Wang’s past observation of these trusted
henchwomen of her sister-in-law had not been sufficient to make her mistrust them
and she welcomed this new arrival as a reinforcement.
‘Ah, just the person!’ she said as she caught sight of her. ‘After you have reported
back to your mistress, you will be able to go with these others into the Garden and
keep an eye on them for me.’
On a number of past visits to the Garden Wang Shan-bao’s wife had been greatly put
out by the failure of the maids there to show her the respect and consideration that
she felt to be her due; but dearly as she would have liked to teach those young
creatures a lesson, she had not so far found a sufficient pretext for doing so. This
discovery of an obscene object in the Garden was, in her eyes, a godsend, and her
recruitment by Lady Wang to play a part in the investigations arising out of it was the
kind of opportunity she had dreamed of.
‘We’ll get to the bottom of this easy enough, don’t you worry, madam,’ she said.
‘What you need in that Garden is more discipline, if you don’t mind my saying so, and
has been for some time. To see the way those young maids carry on there, you would
think they were princesses. They can have that whole place in an uproar, yet none of
us dares to breathe a word against them, for we know that if we did, they would go
running off to their young mistresses and get them to complain that it’s them we
have been criticizing: and that is a charge which none of us is willing to stand up to.’
Lady Wang nodded.
‘Yes, I suppose the girls who wait on the young mistresses are inclined to be a bit
spoiled.’
‘The young mistresses’ maids are by no means the worst,’ said Wang Shan-bao’s
wife. ‘The worst of the lot is that Skybright that works in Bao-yu’s room. Because
she’s a bit better-looking than the others and a bit readier with her tongue, she goes
around dolled up all the time like a Xi-shi, putting everyone else in their place. She
likes the sound of her own voice, does that young woman, and she likes to have her
own way. If you say the slightest little thing to offend her, up fly her eyebrows and
she will begin telling you exactly what she thinks of you. Oh, she’s a proper little
madam, that one! Not much of the maidservant about her!’
A sudden recollection seemed to strike Lady Wang while Wang Shan-bao’s wife was
speaking. She turned to Xi-feng questioningly.
‘I remember last time I was in the Garden with Lady Jia seeing a maid, a
snaky-waisted girl with narrow, sloping shoulders and something of your Cousin Lin
about the eyes, shouting at one of the junior maids, and thinking what a thoroughly
objectionable young woman she must be. I didn’t say anything at the time because I
was with Lady Jia. I meant to try and find out who she was afterwards, but I forgot. I
wonder if this is the same girl? It sounds uncommonly like her.’
‘Skybright is certainly the best-looking of the maids,’ said Xi-feng cautiously, ‘and as
regards her behaviour and manner of speaking, I suppose you could say she is
inclined to be a little too free. The person you describe certainly sounds as if it might
have been her, but as I wasn’t myself there at the time, I wouldn’t like to say for sure
that it was.’
‘There’s no need to go on wondering,’ said Wang Shan?bao’s wife. ‘We can call her
here this minute and Her Ladyship can see for herself whether it’s her or not.’
‘Whenever I see anyone from Bao-yu’s room, it’s always either Aroma or Musk,’
said Lady Wang. ‘Both of them are the kind of plain, simple girl I like. They would
never send the kind of girl we are talking about to see me because they know that
that is just the sort of creature I cannot abide. Oh dear! One can’t help wondering,
when a thing like this happens: suppose Bao-yu were to be corrupted by a little harpy
like that...?’
After some moments’ reflection, she called in her own maid from outside.
‘I want you to go over to Master Bao’s place and say that there is something I want
to ask them about. Say that I would rather Aroma and Musk stayed behind to look
after Bao-yu. There is a girl there called Skybright who is very intelligent. You can tell
her to come. Say she is to come over with you straight away. You are not to say
anything to her on the way here.’
‘Yes, my lady,’ said the maid, and hurried off to Green Delights.
When she arrived Skybright, who had recently been feeling far from well, was just
getting up from a nap and was only half awake: but as the order said ‘Come at once’,
she had to go with the maid as she was, with no time to make herself presentable.
However, this did not unduly concern her. Knowing Lady Wang’s aversion to people
of her type, she would normally have felt some nervousness about having to appear
before her. On this occasion she took comfort from the fact that her indisposition
over the last few days had caused her to neglect her appearance. Dowdiness would
count in her favour.
Alas! When she arrived in Xi-feng’s room, Lady Wang took one look at this languid
vision with its tousled hair, crooked hairpins and rumpled dress and felt all the anger
she had just conquered rising up again inside her - particularly when she recognized
this as being almost certainly the same girl as the one who had aroused her ire on
that previous occasion a month before in the Garden.
‘Good gracious me!’ she exclaimed sarcastically. ‘What swooning Xi-shi have we
here? For whose benefit do you go around in this extraordinary get-up? Don’t
imagine I don’t know what your little game is, young lady! I may not have done
anything about you yet, but I’ll have the skin off you one of these days! - Is Bao-yu
any better?’
Though shaken by the unexpectedness of this onslaught, Skybright realized at once
that someone must have been saying things about her. And although understandably
angry, she managed to keep her head. She was too intelligent not to realize that the
question about Bao-yu was a trap. She knelt to answer it.
‘I don’t often go into Bao-yu’s room, madam, or see much of him, so I am afraid I
am not able to tell you. It’s Aroma and Musk who mostly wait on him. They would be
able to give Your Ladyship an answer.’
‘Little liar!’ said Lady Wang. ‘You’ve got eyes in your head, haven’t you? What’s the
good of employing you if you can’t even tell me whether he’s well or not?’
‘I used to be Her Old Ladyship’s maid,’ said Skybright. ‘She selected me for night
duty in the outer room at Green Delights because she thought that, going to live in
the big, empty Garden he might get frightened at night. I told Her Old Ladyship that I
was too stupid to work for Bao-yu, but that only made her angry. She said, “I’m not
asking you to wait on him personally. You don’t need to be clever for the job I’m
asking you to do.” So after that I had to go. I don’t see him very often. He might call
me in once or twice every ten days or so to ask me about something and I just
answer him and go back to my work. His meals and all the personal service are
looked after either by the older servants and nannies or by Aroma and Musk and
Ripple. Whenever I’ve got time for it, I still have a lot of Her Old Ladyship’s sewing to
do. I’m afraid I don’t pay much attention to what Bao-yu is doing. I will do so in
future, if Your Ladyship wishes me to.’
Lady Wang was completely taken in.
‘Please don’t trouble yourself,’ she said hastily. ‘Holy Name! I’m only too happy to
learn that you don’t see much of him. So you were given to him by Her Old Ladyship.
I suppose in that case I shall have to see her first before I can dismiss you.’
She turned to Wang Shan-hao’s wife.
‘When you and the others go into the Garden, I want you to take particular care
that this girl is kept well away from Bao-yu. Make sure that she doesn’t sleep in the
same room. I shall be dealing with her in a few days’ time, when I have had a chance
of speaking about her to Her Old Ladyship.’
As she turned again momentarily towards Skybright, her voice rose almost into a
shout.
‘Get out of here! The sight of you standing there like a young trollop offends my
eyes! Who gave you permission anyway to dress yourself up in that garish fashion?’
Skybright left the room, utterly crushed. She buried her face in her handkerchief as
soon as she was outside the door and wept into it every step of the way back to
Green Delights.
Meanwhile Lady Wang was telling Xi-feng how much she regretted her remissness in
having allowed creatures like Skybright to inhabit the Garden for so long undisturbed.
‘I wish I had had the energy to keep a closer watch on things,’ she said. I never
expected to find a young flibber?tigibbet like that in the Garden. And I suppose if
there is one there like that, there are likely to be others like it as well.’
Xi-feng could see that Lady Wang was too incensed to reason with; and however
much she might have said to the point, she would not in any case have dared to do
so in front of Wang Shan-bao’s wife, who was one of her mother?-in-law’s principal
informants and a most notorious stirrer-up of trouble. She merely lowered her head,
therefore, and murmured assent.
It was Wang Shan-bao’s wife who spoke.
‘Don’t upset yourself, my lady. Leave all these little things to me. There’s a very easy
way of getting to the bottom of this business. Tonight, when the Garden gates have
been shut and there is no chance of word getting through inside, we’ll make a
surprise visit and search all the maids’ rooms in each of the apartments. Whoever
owned this thing we’re trying to find out about must have other things like it as well,
so if we find anything like it in our search, we shall have found the owner.
‘That sounds like a good idea,’ said Lady Wang. ‘We shall never get anywhere
unless we do something like that. - What do you think?’ she asked Xi-feng.
Xi-feng deemed it impolitic to disagree.
‘If you think it’s all right, Aunt, I should let her do it.
‘I do think it’s all right,’ said Lady Wang emphatically. ‘Unless we do it this way, we
might spend a year investigating and still get nowhere.’
A raid was accordingly planned for that very evening. After dinner, when
Grandmother Jia had retired for the night and the cousins had all returned to their
apartments, Wang Shan-bao’s wife, having first asked Xi-feng to accompany her, led
her little party into the Garden. After ordering all the side gates to be closed, she set
about searching immediately, beginning with the room just inside the Garden gate
which was used by the women of the night watch as a rendez-vous. Nothing of
interest was discovered there except for a few candle-ends and a little leftover
lamp-oil which someone had evidently put by to take home. However, Wang
Shan-bao’s wife solemnly pronounced them to be stolen property: no one was to
touch these things, she said, until Lady Wang had been informed and the appropriate
steps had been taken. They proceeded to Green Delights, barring the courtyard gates
after them as soon as they were inside.
Bao-yu was still worrying about Skybright when this party of women came bursting
into his courtyard and, without a word of explanation, walked straight into the part of
the house occupied by the maids. On going out to investigate he ran into Xi-feng and
asked her what was happening. Xi-feng went indoors to sit down with him and
accepted a cup of tea.
‘Something important is missing that no one will own up to having taken,’ she said.
‘It’s thought that one of the maids in the Garden might have stolen it, so they are
searching everyone in order to clear the innocent ones of suspicion.’
While Xi-feng was explaining this to Bao-yu, Wang Shan-bao’s wife was proceeding
with her search.
‘Whose are these trunks?’ she asked, and demanded that the owners should come
forward and open them.
Aroma had suspected that some sort of trouble lay ahead when she saw the state
that Skybright was in when she returned from her interview. The raid confirmed her
premonition. Resignedly she set the other maids an example by opening her own
trunks and boxes first. Nothing of interest was found in them. The searchers passed
on. Each girl stood by her own things and opened them up as the searchers came to
them. Finally only Skybright’s trunk remained.
‘Which girl’s is this?’ said Wang Shan-bao’s wife. ‘Why doesn’t she come forward
and open it?’
Aroma was on the point of opening it herself when Skybright, who, to judge from the
state her hair was in, had only just got out of bed, came rushing into the room, flung
the lid open with a bang, picked the trunk up by its bottom, and emptied its contents
on the floor. Wang Shan-bao’s wife blushed scarlet with embarrassment.
‘There’s no cause to be angry with me, miss,’ she said. ‘I’m not carrying this search
out to please myself, I’m here on Her Ladyship’s orders. If you don’t want your things
to be searched, you have only to say so and I shall tell Her Ladyship. There’s no need
to carry on like this about it.’
At this Skybright’s wrath blazed up in fury. She pointed at the old woman’s face.
‘You say you are here on Her Ladyship’s orders. Well I’m here on Her Old Ladyship’s
orders. Anyway, I thought I knew all the women who worked at Her Ladyship’s place
and I’m sure I never saw a self-important, meddlesome old busy?body like you there
before!’
Xi-feng, who had now rejoined them, was secretly delighted to see Wang Shan-bao’s
wife getting the rough side of Skybright’s tongue, but because the woman was her
mother-in-law’s favourite, she had to pretend that she was shocked, and shouted at
Skybright to be silent. Wang Shan-bao’s wife looked angry and flustered and seemed
on the point of re?torting; but Xi-feng restrained her.
‘All right, Mrs Wang, that will do. You don’t have to put yourself on the same level
by arguing with the girl. You get on with your searching. We’ve got all the other
places to go to yet, and if we delay too long, word will get round that we are coming
and they will be prepared for us. If that happens and you don’t succeed in finding
anything, I shan’t consider myself responsible.’
Though inwardly fuming, Wang Shan-bao’s wife was obliged to contain herself and
spent the next minute or two rummaging tight-lipped among Skybright’s possessions.
Having found nothing of importance, she then asked Xi-feng if they might go
elsewhere.
‘Now have you looked really thoroughly?’ said Xi-feng. ‘You’re going to look pretty
silly if you have to report back to Lady Wang tomorrow that you couldn’t find
any?thing.’
‘We’ve been through everything,’ said one of the women. ‘There’s nothing here
that there shouldn’t be. We did find one or two boy’s things, but they were the sort
of things a quite small boy would use. Probably they belonged to Bao-yu when he
was little. Anyway, they’re of no conse?quence.’
‘In that case we can be on our way,’ said Xi-feng, pleasantly. ‘On to the next place,
then!’
Off they went without more ado. Xi-feng turned to Wang Shan-bao’s wife as they
walked along for a word in her ear.
‘I’ve got a suggestion to make, but I don’t know whether you’ll agree to it or not.
Can we confine this search to members of our own household? I don’t think we
ought to search the maids in Miss Xue’s room.’
‘Oh, I quite agree,’ said Wang Shan-bao’s wife. ‘It would never do to go searching
the rooms of our guests.’
Xi-feng nodded.
     ‘That’s what I thought’
They had by now reached the Naiad’s House. Dai-yu had already gone to bed when
the arrival of all these people was announced. Unable to guess what they could have
come for, she was on the point of getting up to ask when Xi-feng came into her room
and begged her to stay in bed.
‘Go to sleep. We shall be gone again in a moment.’
She slipped out again after a few inconsequences and rejoined the others, who had
already begun their searching. In the course of rummaging through the various
trunks and boxes in Nightingale’s room they came across some old amulets whose
period of effectiveness had long since expired and a set of two pouches and a
fan-case designed for wearing on a belt. The fan-case had a fan in it, which they took
out to examine. These were obviously masculine articles and had in fact been worn
at one time by Bao-yu. Wang Shan-bao’s wife, congratulating herself on what she
took to be a signifi?cant discovery, called Xi-feng over to witness it.
‘Look at these things, Mrs Lian! Now where would these have come from?’
Xi-feng smiled.
‘These would be old things of Bao-yu’s,’ she said. ‘He and the girls here have been
seeing each other for years - since they were little children. Their Ladyships would
probably remember having seen these things on him. You could always ask them, if
you don’t believe me.’
Wang Shan-bao’s wife was at once all smiles.
‘If you recognize them, Mrs Lian, that’s good enough for me.’
‘There’s nothing here worth bothering about,’ said Xi-?feng. ‘I think we should
leave these folk in peace and hurry on elsewhere.’
‘We’ve had so many other things where these came from and given so many in
return that I can’t keep track of them,’ said Nightingale laughing. ‘I couldn’t for the
life of me tell you when he gave us these.’
Xi-feng and Wang Shan-bao’s wife now conducted their little party to Tan-chun’s
place. This time their arrival was anticipated. Someone had brought word of their
coming, and Tan-chun, guessing that something serious must have happened to have
provoked so ugly a reaction, was standing in the open doorway, surrounded by maids
with lighted candles, waiting for the search party when it arrived.
‘Well?’ she asked, somewhat challengingly. ‘What do you want?’
Xi-feng smiled an emollient smile.
‘Something has been missing and they have been questioning everyone for several
days now without being able to find out who took it. It’s thought that whoever is
responsible for the theft might try to incriminate one of the maids. We are making
this search more for the sake of clearing them than because we really suspect any of
them of taking it.’
‘Naturally all my maids are thieves,’ said Tan-chun affably. ‘As a matter of fact, I am
their principal fence. If you want to search, you’d better look at my cupboards and
boxes first, because anything they steal is automatically handed over to me.’
She ordered the maids to open all her boxes. She also made them bring in her
dressing-cases, jewel-boxes, bedding-rolls and miscellaneous wrapped-up bundles of
clothing and open them all up for Xi-feng to inspect.
Xi-feng laughed uncomfortably.
‘I’m only carrying out your mother’s orders, coz. There’s no point in getting
offended with me.’ She turned to the servants. ‘Quickly, do these things up again for
Miss Tan.’
Scribe and Ebony, assisted by Patience and Felicity, began refastening the boxes and
tying the bundles up again.
‘I’ve said that you may search my things,’ said Tan-chun, ‘but if you want to search
my maids’, I’m afraid that won’t be possible. You see, I am a very hard mistress. I
always insist on knowing what my maids have got; consequently everything they
have - every needle and thread even - is taken care of by me; I don’t allow them to
keep anything themselves. So if you want to do any searching, you will have to search
me. If that doesn’t satisfy you, you have only to report to Lady Wang that I was
obstructive and I will gladly face whatever the consequences are tomorrow. I must
say, I cannot understand this eagerness to meet trouble half-way. The searching will
begin soon enough in this household when the day of confiscation arrives. Didn’t you
hear the news this morning about the Zhens? They tempted fate, just as we are now
doing, by carrying out a quite unnecessary search of their own servants, and now
there is a confiscation order against them and they are being searched themselves.
No doubt our time too is coming, slowly but surely. A great household like ours is not
destroyed in a day. “The beast with a thousand legs is a long time dying.” In order for
the destruction to be complete, it has to begin from within.’
She began to cry. Xi-feng darted a look at the women, which Zhou Rui’s wife
interpreted as a signal that they should go.
‘Since Miss Tan has said that the girls’ things are all here, Mrs Lian, can’t we go on
to another place now and leave her in peace?’
Xi-feng responded by rising to her feet and wishing Tan?chun good night.
‘Are you sure you’ve looked properly?’ said Tan-chun. ‘It’s no good coming back
tomorrow and asking to look again, because I shan’t let you.’
‘If all the maids’ things are in here, there is no need to look,’ said Xi-feng, smiling.
‘No need to look, when I’ve gone to the trouble of having everything opened for
you?’ said Tan-chun coldly. ‘I call that rather perverse. Tomorrow I suppose you will
say that I covered up for my maids and wouldn’t let you look. I want to be told in
plain language that you have searched as much as you want to. If you haven’t, you’d
better do so now, while you have the chance.’
Xi-feng smiled. She knew from past experience that she had to be more careful with
Tan-chun than with any of the other girls.
‘I have already searched your maids’ things and your things sufficiently.’
‘And what about the rest of you?’ Tan-chun asked the women.
‘We’ve searched enough,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife and the other women, smiling.
It was now that Wang Shan-bao’s wife showed her total lack of judgement - for she
was in truth a very stupid woman. She had heard something of Tan-chun’s reputation
in the past, but refused to believe that an unmarried girl of her years - particularly
one who was a concubine’s daughter -could be as formidable as Tan-chun was said to
be. No doubt, she told herself, it was the inexperience or pusillanimity of her
informants that made them think her so. Was not she, Wang Shan-bao’s wife, one of
Lady Xing’s oldest and most trusted servants? Did not even Lady Wang have to show
her a cer?tain measure of deference? A mere chit of a girl like Tan-chun was not
going to intimidate her. She had, in any case, the distinct impression that it was
Xi-feng and not herself that Tan-chun was angry with. At all events, she resolved to
show how little she held Tan-chun in esteem by indulging in a little horse-play at her
expense. Going up to Tan-chun, she took hold of a corner of her jacket and turned it
back, grinning all over her face.
‘There!’ she said. ‘Now I’ve even searched Miss Tan, and there’s nothing on her
either!’
Xi-feng was shocked.
‘Good gracious, woman! Are you -?’
But before she could finish there was a resounding smack! and a large red mark
appeared on the old woman’s face where Tan-chun had hit her.
Tan-chun was in a towering rage.
‘Who do you think you are? How dare you touch me? It seems that the respect that
I and the others show you, even though it is only for Her Ladyship’s sake and out of
consideration for your age, merely encourages you to make mischief for us and abuse
your borrowed powers. That, in all conscience, is hard enough to bear. But now, to
lay hands on me - that is really too much! If you have reckoned on my being a poor,
timid creature like your Miss Ying whom you can bully and impose upon at your
pleasure, you have made a very big mistake. You may search my things if you wish
and I shall not complain; but I will not be made a laughing-stock. Here!’ - with one
hand she began feverishly undoing her buttons, while with the other she pulled
Xi-feng’s hand towards her and placed it beneath her jacket ‘Search me! I would
rather be searched by you than submit to being pawed over by a slave!’
Xi-feng and Patience quickly buttoned her up again and straightened out her dress,
shouting angrily at Wang Shan?bao’s wife as they did so.
‘You have been drinking again, Nannie. Why do you do it, if it makes you behave so
badly? You’d better get out of here, before worse happens!’
Patience did her best to comfort Tan-chun.
‘Dear miss! Please don’t distress yourself. She isn’t worth your getting upset about!’
Tan-chun gave a humourless laugh.
‘I’m not upset. If I’d been upset I should have beaten my brains out before I’d have
let her touch me. I shall see Grandmother and Lady Wang about this first thing
tomorrow, and after that I shall call on Lady Xing and make whatever amends she
likes to ask for.’
Wang Shan-bao’s wife had retreated hastily from the room after her discomfiture and
was now lurking outside the window complaining bitterly of the outrage to her
dignity.
‘This is the first time anyone has ever struck me. I shall see Lady Xing tomorrow and
ask her to let me go back to my old home. If this is the way I am to be treated, I had
rather not go on living!’
‘Do you hear what that woman is saying?’ Tan-chun asked her maids. ‘Are you
waiting for me to go out there and argue with her myself?’
Scribe, needing no second prompting, hurried outside to take up the cudgels for her
mistress.
If I were in your shoes, Mrs Wang, I should have the sense to keep my mouth shut.
We should all be only too pleased if you really did go back to your own home; but I’m
afraid that when it comes to it, you won’t be able to tear yourself away. After all, if
you go, who will there be left to worm her way into Her Ladyship’s confidence and
make all our lives a misery by having searches made?’
Xi-feng was greatly amused.
‘Good for Scribe! “Like mistress, like maid”!’
‘Oh,’ said Tan-chun coldly, ‘we thieves have ready wits. We are all capable of
turning a phrase or two. It’s only when it comes to going behind other people’s backs
and stirring those in authority up against them that we are not quite so clever.’
Patience made some soothing remark to Tan-chun, simultaneously making a grab at
Scribe and pulling her back into the room, while Zhou Rui’s wife and the other
women did their best to be conciliatory. Xi-feng remained until she had seen
Tan-chun safely put to bed before leading her party off in the direction of Xi-chun’s
Spring in Winter room in the Lotus Pavilion, briefly taking in Li Wan’s place on the
way.
As Li Wan was unwell and had already taken her medicine and settled down for the
night by the time they arrived, they went into the maids’ room straight away without
disturbing her. After searching each of the maids’ boxes in turn and finding nothing,
they continued on their way to Xi-chun’s apartment.
Being younger and more immature than the other cousins, Xi-chun was much more
frightened by this visitation and at first seemed to be quite bewildered by it. It took
all of Xi?feng’s efforts to calm her. Unfortunately, while they were searching in
Picture’s trunk, they came upon a large packet containing thirty or forty silver
medallions, a carved jade belt-buckle, a pair of men’s boots and a pair of socks. Even
Xi-feng turned pale.
‘Where did these come from?’ she asked the unhappy maid.
Picture knelt down and tearfully confessed the truth.
‘They were given to my brother by Mr Zhen, madam. Since our parents went to live
in the South, our uncle and aunt have been looking after us. They both drink and
gamble a lot, and my brother was afraid that if he left anything with them they would
sell it and spend the money, so he made a secret arrangement with one of the old
nannies to bring things in to me so that I could look after them for him.’
Xi-chun, a naturally timorous child, was terrified by this discovery.
‘I knew nothing about this!’ she cried. ‘It is very wicked of her. If you want to beat
her, cousin, please do it outside. I’m not used to hearing such things. I think it would
distress me.’
Xi-feng smiled.
‘If what you say is true,’ she told Picture, ‘you can be forgiven for looking after
these things. But your brother had no business to choose such a way of getting them
in to you. If these things could be smuggled in without anyone knowing, then so
could anything else. It’s the person who brought them in who is the really guilty party.
Of course, if what you say is not true, you may as well give up hope of living!’
‘I wouldn’t dare lie to you, madam,’ said Picture, weeping. ‘You have only to ask Mr
and Mrs Zhen. If they say my brother wasn’t given these things, I shan’t complain if
you beat us both to death.’
‘I shall certainly ask,’ said Xi-feng. ‘But even if he was given them, you are still to
blame. Who said that you could have things brought in to you secretly? I shall let you
off this once if you will tell me honestly who brought them in, but you mustn’t ever
do this again.’
‘Don’t let her off!’ said Xi-chun. ‘There are so many maids. If the older ones see her
getting away with it, there’s no knowing what they will get up to. You may want to
forgive her, but I don’t.’
‘She seems to me a pretty sensible girl as a rule,’ said Xi?feng. ‘We all make
mistakes sometimes. I’m only proposing that we should let her off this once. If she
does anything like this again, we shall punish her for this offence as well. - Come on
now, what about this person who brought you the things?’ she asked Picture. ‘Tell
me who it was.’
‘Oh, I can tell you that,’ said Xi-chun. ‘It’s sure to have been that old Zhang woman
from the rear gate. She’s always around here, whispering guiltily to the maids and
doing little favours for them - in return for which, of course, they give her their
protection.’
Xi-feng told one of the women to make a note of this. The silver and the other things
she gave to Zhou Rui’s wife to take care of until Picture’s statement about their
provenance could be verified.
This old Mamma Zhang whom Xi-chun had named as the go-between who had
brought things in for Picture’s brother was a close kinswoman of Wang Shan-bao’s
wife, being in fact the mother-in-law of one of her children. However, since becoming
Lady Xing’s chief confidante, Wang Shan?bao’s wife had had little time for kinsfolk or
former colleagues, and her treatment of Mamma Zhang had caused that matron to
take umbrage. On two occasions there had been words between them, and for some
time now the two of them had not been on speaking terms. The satisfaction of
learning that the guilty bearer of these objects was a hated enemy almost
compensated Wang Shan-bao’s wife for the indignity of being slapped by Tan-chun
and taunted by Tan-chun’s maid. She endeavoured to impress Xi-feng with the gravity
of what they had discovered.
‘This smuggling is a very serious business, Mrs Lian. No doubt the things we are
looking for got into the Garden by the same way. I think you ought to look into this.’
‘I fully intend to do so,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I don’t need you to tell me.’
They took leave of Xi-chun then and made their way to Ying-chun’s. Ying-chun was
asleep when they arrived and the maids had already gone to bed. They had to knock
a long while at the gate before anyone answered.
‘There’s no need to disturb your mistress,’ Xi-feng said to the girl who admitted
them, and made straight for the maids’ room, followed by the rest of the party.
Knowing that Wang Shan-bao’s wife was Chess’s maternal grandmother, Xi-feng
watched her very attentively to see if she would show any favouritism. Wang
Shan-bao’s wife began on the trunks of the other maids. None of them contained
anything of interest. Coming to Chess’s trunk last of all, she merely picked up one or
two things lying on the top of it before hurriedly pronouncing that there was ‘nothing
there’, and would have shut it up again if Zhou Rui’s wife had not intervened to
prevent her.
     ‘Now just a minute. Whether there is or not, you’ve got to go through it properly,
the same as you did the rest, out of fairness to the others.’
She stretched her own hand out as she said this and, diving into the trunk, fetched
out, successively, a pair of men’s padded socks, a pair of men’s satin slippers, and a
packet containing a little Loving Couple ornament and a letter. All these things she
handed over to Xi-feng.
From handling so many bills, invoices and accounts during her years as a household
manager, Xi-feng had learned to recognize quite a large number of characters and
was able to make out the whole of the crude missive, written on pink Double
Happiness notepaper, that Zhou Rui’s wife had just thrust into her hand.
     Since your visit last month my parnts have fund out about us but cant do any
thing til Miss Yings marrid if
     you can meet me in the garden send word by mrs Zhang we can talk more frely
in the garden than at home
   PLEASE TRY I have recd the two rosearys I send you this bag it shows you what I
dream of!! PLEASE
KEEP IT!!! your loving kit cousin PAN YOU?AN
     Xi-feng could hardly restrain herself from laughing out loud.
     Wang Shan-bao’s wife knew nothing of the romantic history that lay behind this
letter; but she had already had an un?comfortable feeling that all was not well when
she saw the men’s socks and shoes; and now, as she watched Xi-feng reading the
words on the pink notepaper and laughing at what she read, she became even more
apprehensive.
‘What is it, madam? An account?’ she said. ‘I suppose you are laughing because
there is some mistake in it.’
‘It certainly doesn’t balance properly,’ said Xi-feng, laughing. ‘If you are Chess’s
grandmother, shouldn’t her kit-cousin be a Wang?’
Wang Shan-bao’s wife found the question a very strange one.
‘She has a kit-cousin on her father’s side, her father’s sister’s son. Pan You-an, that
boy who ran away - he’s her kit-cousin.’
‘That makes sense,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Would you like me to read you the letter?’
     She proceeded to do so, to the great astonishment of all present. Wang
Shan-bao’s wife, who had sought out the wrongdoing of others with such
single-minded persistency, was now mortified to discover that the only wrongdoer
she had succeeded in unmasking was her own granddaughter.
‘Did you hear that, Mrs Wang?’ said Zhou Rui’s wife, who, like the other women,
had signalled her astonishment by sticking her tongue out and wagging her head
incredu?lously. ‘Couldn’t be clearer than that, could it? No talking a way out of that
one! So what do we do now?’
Wang Shan-bao’s wife heartily wished that it were possible to slip through some
crack and disappear into the ground. Xi-feng contemplated her for some moments
with enjoyment, her lips puckered up with suppressed laughter.
‘One must look on the bright side,’ she said to Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘The girl has quietly
gone off and chosen herself a husband. At least her grandmother is saved the bother
of choosing one for her!’
Zhou Rui’s wife laughed, and added some pleasantry of her own. Wang Shan-bao’s
wife was left with no one but herself on whom to vent her anger, so she slapped her
own face and reproached herself.
‘Silly old fool! You’ve lived too long, that’s your trouble! Look what you’ve brought
on yourself! Why couldn’t you have kept your mouth shut? Now you’ve got to suffer
for your own foolishness.’
The others had not the heart to laugh, but could not help feeling pleased, either
because she had made them suffer in the past and it was sweet to see her suffer now
in her turn, or from a more detached belief that they were witnessing the
working-out of divine retribution on one who had richly deserved its visitation.
Xi-feng noticed with surprise that Chess, who all this time had been standing by with
bowed head, saying nothing, had no trace of fear or shame in her expression and
wondered if she might be planning to make away with herself. As it was obviously too
late that night for questioning her, she deputed two of the women to watch over her
until morning. She herself went off with the other women, taking the things with her
as evidence.
It was her intention to deal with the matter in the morning, after a night’s sleep, but
during the course of the night she was several times obliged to get out of bed, and
each time she did so she found that she was losing blood. By the time next morning
came, she was too weak and dizzy to get up. A doctor was called. He took her pulses,
wrote a prescription, and left, saying that she would need to rest. His findings,
reported to Lady Wang by the old nannies who went to have the prescription made
up, plunged that already depressed gentlewoman into yet greater gloom. Thus
judgement on Chess’s affair was, for the time being, postponed.
*
You-shi, as it happened, called in that day to see Xi-feng and sat for a while talking
with her. After that she went on to see Li Wan and talked with her. While she was
there, a maid arrived to ask if she would mind calling in to see Xi-chun, so she went
along to Xi-chun’s. As soon as she arrived, Xi-chun launched into a long and detailed
account of what had happened the previous night. She also sent someone round to
ask Zhou Rui’s wife for the things that had been found in Picture’s trunk. You-shi
verified that they had indeed been given by Cousin Then to Picture’s brother.
‘Stupid creature!’ she said, turning to rebuke Picture, who was standing by.
‘Why do you call her names?’ said Xi-chun. ‘It was your laxness which made her the
way she is. It’s too bad. None of the other girls has been let down like this by her
maids. How shall I be able to face them after this? I told Cousin Feng last night to
take her away, but she wouldn’t. I am glad that you have come, because now you will
be able to. I don’t care what you do with her - beat her, kill her, sell her - I just want
to be rid of her.’
Picture knelt down and implored her mistress most piteously not to send her away.
You-shi and Xi-chun’s nurses also did their best to talk Xi-chun out of dismissing her.
‘It was only a single lapse on her part,’ said You-shi. ‘I’m sure she won’t do it again.
Think of all the years of service she has given you.’
But Xi-chun, in whom the natural waywardness of youth was reinforced by a perverse
contrariness that was all her own, remained adamant in the face of both argument
and entreaty and insisted that Picture must go.
‘And it isn’t only Picture that I don’t want to see any more,’ she told You-shi. ‘The
same goes for all the rest of you. From now on I propose to stop going round to your
place altogether. There has been a lot of talk about you people of late. If I continue to
go round, I am afraid I might get involved in it.
‘Who has been talking about us?’ said You-shi. ‘And what, pray, have they found to
talk about? I think you might begin by considering who you are - and who we are. If
you have heard people talking about us, I should have thought it was up to you to ask
them what they meant by it.’
‘That’s rather strange advice coming from you,’ said Xi-chun sneeringly. ‘A girl like
me is supposed to keep well away from scandal, not go running headlong towards it.
You know the saying: “A father should help a son and the son his father, but not in
slaying or in doing evil.” The same principle holds good for you and me. I can only
answer for my own integrity. If you people end up by getting yourselves into a mess, I
don’t want to have anything to do with it.
You-shi was half angered and half amused by her young sister-in-law’s rudeness.
‘I can see now why people speak of Miss Xi as young for her age,’ she said,
addressing the grown-up servants below the kang. “‘Young and foolish” I have heard
her called. I used not to believe it of her, but finding her now so unreason?able and
so lacking in any sense of proportion, I really do begin to despair of her.’
‘She is still very young,’ said the women placatingly. ‘You must expect a few knocks
in your dealings with her, Mrs Zhen.’
‘I may be “young”,’ said Xi-chun scornfully, ‘but there is nothing “young” about
what I have just been saying. And since none of you people can even read or write,
how can you have the nerve to call me “foolish”?’
‘You are the great scholar, of course,’ said You-shi sarcastic?ally, ‘the Top of the List
candidate! Stupid people like us cannot hope to compete with you in understanding.’
‘There’s certainly not much understanding in what you have just said,’ Xi-chun
retorted. ‘Your assumption that a Top of the List candidate cannot be stupid is a
vulgar fallacy typical of the great mass of blind, undiscriminating world?lings. A true
sage can be identified by the very first step he takes, not by examination results.’
‘Goodness!’ said You-shi mockingly. ‘A moment ago we had the great scholar; now,
it seems, the great preacher has come to enlighten us!’
‘I lay no claim to enlightenment,’ said Xi-chun, ‘though I can see that most people
are no better than Picture - and that they are as little worth bothering about.’
‘You are a cold-hearted little monster,’ said You-shi.
‘If I seem cold, it is because I wish to keep myself uncorrupted,’ said Xi-chun. ‘Why
should I want to get involved with you and allow myself to be dragged down to your
level?’
You-shi was highly sensitive to remarks about her family’s reputation and had already
been embarrassed and upset by Xi-chun’s reference to ‘people talking’. Because
Xi-chun was only a girl, she had done her best not to lose her temper; but this last
remark was too much to stomach. Unable to contain herself any longer, she burst out
angrily.
‘What do you mean, “dragged down to my level”? You turn your maid’s offence into
an occasion for making a completely unwarranted attack upon me, and when I bear
your ridiculous attacks with patience, it seems merely to encourage you to indulge in
further insults. Very well, Miss Holy Purity! I shall be careful to keep away from you in
future, in case your priceless reputation is sullied by my presence.’
She swept out angrily, indicating to her maids as she went that they should bring
Picture with them.
‘It will be much better for all concerned if you don’t ever come here again,’ Xi-chun
called out after her. ‘It will save a lot of argument.’
You-shi heard this and grew even angrier; but reflecting that Xi-chun was, however
vexing, a young unmarried daughter of the family and therefore not a person with
whom she could engage in open wrangling, she swallowed her anger and hur?ried off
without answering, out of the Garden and into the inner part of the mansion.
What she heard there will be related in the chapter which follows.
CHAPTER 75

Midnight revellers are startled
by a sound of evil omen
And Mid-Autumn moon-watchers listen
to quatrains of unequal merit



When You-shi swept angrily out of Xi-chun’s apartment, it had been her intention to
visit Lady Wang, but one of the old women in her suite whispered in her ear to advise
her against going there.
‘Some people from the Zhen family have just arrived there, madam, with a lot of
things. I think it’s something secret they’ve come about. It probably wouldn’t be very
convenient for you to go there now.’
‘That’s funny,’ said You-shi. ‘I heard your master saying last night that he had read in
the Gazette that the Zhens had been attainted. It said that there was a search and
confiscation order on their estate and that the family were being brought under
arrest to the capital for questioning. What can any of them be doing here?’
‘You may well ask, madam. It was some of the women?folk we saw there. They
were in a terrible state, very worried and frightened. I expect they are doing
something they ought not to be.’
You-shi abandoned her idea of visiting Lady Wang and went back to see Li Wan, with
whom she had been talking a little earlier when Xi-chun called her away. Li Wan had
been visited in the meantime by her doctor; and as she was feeling much livelier than
she had done for some days, she had remained sitting up after her visit. You-shi
found her propped up on pillows and with the bedclothes pulled up round her, eager
for conversation. Unfortunately You-shi, who had been so affable on her earlier visit,
was now in no mood to talk and sat at Li Wan’s bedside silent and pre?occupied. Li
Wan wondered if she was feeling hungry.
‘Have something to eat,’ she said. ‘What would you like?’ She turned to Candida.
‘What nice little snack have we got that we could offer Mrs Zhen?’
‘Please don’t bother,’ said You-shi. ‘You’re hardly likely to have interesting snacks in
the house after being an invalid for so many days. And in any case I’m not hungry.’
‘Someone sent me some rather good wheatmeal tea yesterday,’ said Li Wan. ‘Why
don’t you try a bowl of that?’
She told Candida to mix some for her with sugar and boiling water. You-shi made no
reply and continued to brood. The women and maids who had come with her tried to
think of some means of distracting her.
‘You haven’t done your face yet since this morning, madam,’ said one of them.
‘Why not take this opportunity of having a wash?’
You-shi nodded. Li Wan at once sent Candida for her dressing-case and mirror.
Candida offered You-shi the use of her own make-up.
‘Our mistress doesn’t use make-up, Mrs Zhen. If you don’t mind using my stuff,
you’re very welcome to some of this.’
‘It’s true that I haven’t got any,’ said Li Wan, ‘but you ought to have borrowed some
from one of the young ladies to lend her. Fancy offering her your own, and in front of
everyone else! It’s a good job it was Mrs Zhen. Some people would have been most
offended.’
‘Oh, that’s all right,’ said You-shi, and began to wash. The maid with the basin bent
down to hold it out to her.
‘Where are your manners, girl?’ said Li Wan reprovingly, whereupon the maid at
once went down on her knees.
‘Manners!’ said You-shi. ‘The outward frills of respectability! Those are the things
our servants are so good at. What they actually get up to doesn’t bear much
investigating.’
Li Wan realized that she must be referring to the events of the previous night.
‘Why do you say that?’ she asked smilingly. ‘What has who got up to that doesn’t
bear investigating?’
‘Need you ask?’ said You-shi. ‘You’ve not been so ill that you’ve lost the use of your
faculties!’
Before Li Wan could reply, Bao-chai’s arrival was announced. Li Wan and You-shi both
called out to her to come in. You-shi, hurriedly wiping the water from her face, got up
to welcome her and made her sit down with her at the side of the bed.
‘On your own?’ she asked her. ‘Where are all the others?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I haven t seen them yet. Mother isn’t very well today,
and as her two senior maids are also both ill in bed and I don’t trust any of the others,
I thought I had better go and stay with her for a few days. At first I was going to tell
Lady Jia and Aunt Wang, but then I thought that as this is rather a small matter and I
shall in any case be coming back again as soon as Mother is better I wouldn’t bother
them but simply have a word about it with Cousin Wan.’
Li Wan and You-shi exchanged smiles and glances. Presently, when You-shi had
finished her toilet, the three of them each had a bowl of wheatmeal tea.
‘I must send someone to see how your mother is and find out what she is suffering
from,’ said Li Wan. ‘I can’t go in person, unfortunately, because I am ill myself. Don’t
worry about anything here. I’ll send someone to look after your apartment while you
are away. Do come back soon, though, or I shall be blamed for your going.’
‘Whyever should you be?’ said Bao-chai. ‘There’s noth?ing unusual about my going.
You are not being asked to connive at a gaol-break. And incidentally, I don’t see why
it should be necessary to send anyone to my apartment. Why not simply invite
Cousin Shi to stay with you for a few days? Wouldn’t that be simpler?’
‘While we are on the subject, where is Cousin Shi?’ said You-shi.
‘I sent her off just now to look for Cousin Tan,’ said Bao-?chai. ‘She was to bring
Cousin Tan here so that I could explain to her about going to Mother’s too.’
By coincidence ‘Miss Shi and Miss Tan’ were at that very moment announced. As
soon as they were seated, Bao-chai told Tan-chun about her intention of moving
outside for a few days to look after her mother.
‘Very wise,’ said Tan-chun. ‘But why only stay outside until Aunt is better? Why not
move outside altogether?’
‘That’s rather a strange way to talk,’ said You-shi, laughing. ‘It’s as though you
wanted to drive our kinswoman out.’
‘Well, why not?’ said Tan-chun bitterly. ‘Better be driven out now by me than by
someone else later on. Kinsfolk are lucky. They don’t have to stay here. Not like the
members of this happy family - all glaring at each other like angry fighting-cocks,
wondering which will be the first one to strike!’
You-shi laughed.
‘I think today must be my unlucky day. I seem to have caught all you young ladies in
a thoroughly unpleasant mood.’
‘If you don’t like the heat, you should stay away from the fire,’ said Tan-chun.
‘Who’s been upsetting you then?’ She thought for a bit. ‘It’s not likely to have been
Cousin Feng. Not this time. So who was it?’
You-shi’s vague answer evaded the question. Tan-chun knew that she was afraid to
speak openly for fear of causing trouble.
‘Come on!’ she said tauntingly. ‘Don’t act the innocent! It’s not high treason to tell
us. No one’s going to chop your head off. Look at me. Last night I slapped Wang
Shan-bao’s wife’s face. That’s an offence deserving hard labour at the very least, yet
nothing’s happened so far, bar a bit of muttering. I don’t think anyone is going to give
me a beating.’
‘Did you really slap her face?’ Bao-chai asked incredulously.
Tan-chun treated them all to a lively account of what had happened, after which
You-shi, seeing that there was no longer any point in concealment, proceeded to tell
them about her recent encounter with Xi-chun.
‘Oh, she’s always like that,’ said Tan-chun. ‘It’s her nature. Xi-chun is so peculiar,
nothing the rest of us say or do is ever going to alter her. By the way’ - she returned
to the subject that was uppermost in her mind - ‘I made some in?quiries first thing
this morning to find out why nothing was happening. Apparently it’s because Cousin
Feng is ill again. I also sent someone to inquire about Wang Shan-bao’s wife. It seems
that she has been given a beating. For interfering.’
‘Quite right, too!’ said You-shi and Li Wan. But Tan?-chun took a more cynical view.
‘It would be a comparatively easy way of disarming suspicion. We must wait and
see.’
You-shi and Li Wan looked thoughtful, but neither made any comment.
Shortly after this the maids came in to say that dinner was ready. Xiang-yun and
Bao-chai went back to their apart?ment to pack, in preparation for their respective
moves. Our narrative leaves them at this point.
You-shi and Tan-chun, after taking their leave of Li Wan, made their way to
Grandmother Jia’s apartment. The old lady was reclining on her couch listening,
while Lady Wang told her about the Zhens: the offences they had been charged with,
the confiscation of their property and their coming up to the capital now for
questioning. Grand?mother Jia was obviously much shaken by what she heard, but
brightened up somewhat when You-shi and Tan-chun arrived.
‘Where have you both come from?’ she asked them. ‘I suppose you know that Feng
and Wan are both ill now? I wonder how they are today.’
‘They are both a little better,’ said You-shi.
Grandmother Jia nodded and sighed.
‘I think we’ve heard enough about other people’s troubles for the time being. It’s
time we started thinking about the arrangements for our Mid-Autumn party.’
‘The catering arrangements have all been made,’ said Lady Wang. ‘It only remains
for you to decide where you want it. I suppose the nights are getting too chilly now
for us to have it out in the Garden.’
‘We can always put on a bit more clothing,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Of course we
must have it in the Garden. That’s what the Garden is for.’
While they were speaking, some of the women came in carrying the dinner-table
between them. Lady Wang and You-shi laid chopsticks and carried in the rice. When
all was ready, Grandmother noticed that in addition to her own dishes there were
two large food-boxes containing dishes from the other apartments. It was a
long-established custom that the occupants of other apartments should send her
samples of what they were planning to eat that day themselves as a way of showing
her their respect.
‘I’ve told you all a number of times to stop doing this,’ she said. ‘Why won’t you
ever do as I say?’
‘These are only very ordinary things here,’ said Lady Wang, referring to her own
contribution. ‘It’s one of my fast-days today, so I have only vegetarian dishes. I know
you don’t much like bean-curd fried in batter, which is one of the things I am having.
The only thing of mine I think you might like is a salad pickle of chopped
water-mallow in pepper sauce.’
‘That sounds rather nice,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I think I’d like to try some of that.’
Faithful quickly took the saucer containing it out of the box and put it down in front
of her. Bao-qin, having first apologized to each of her seniors for sitting down in their
presence, took her place at one side of the table. Grandmother Jia said that Tan-chun
should eat with her as well, where?upon Tan-chun too made her apologies and sat
down. She sat at the other side of the table opposite Bao-qin. Scribe quickly fetched
her a bowl and chopsticks. Meanwhile Faithful was pointing out the other dishes to
Grandmother Jia.
‘I can’t make out what these two here are. They are from Sir She. The stuff in this
bowl is creamed chicken and bamboo. It’s from Mr Zhen.’
She brought the bowl of sliced bamboo-shoot over and put it down on the table.
Grandmother Jia made a couple of dips into it with her chopsticks. She ordered all
the other dishes to be taken back to their senders.
‘Tell them thank you very much I’ve tried some, but not to send things to me any
more. If I ever want anything, I shall let them know.’
The women made some reply and went off with the boxes.
‘Now bring me my rice-gruel and I’ll have a bit of that,’ said Grandmother Jia.
You-shi stepped forward with a bowl of gruel. It was made with red ‘Emperor’ rice,
she told her. After drinking about half of it, Grandmother Jia ordered the other half to
be taken to Xi-feng. She pointed to one of the dishes.
‘And this is for Patience.’ She turned to You-shi. ‘I’ve finished. Now you can eat.’
‘Thank you,’ said You-shi, but waited all the same until the old lady had rinsed her
mouth and washed her hands and was walking up and down on Lady Wang’s arm for
her digestion before she ‘begged to be seated’. By this time Bao?qin and Tan-chun
had finished eating. They got up as You?-shi sat down, excusing themselves from
keeping her company while she ate.
‘Oh,’ said You-shi, ‘I’m not used to eating at a big table like this all on my own.’
‘Faithful and Amber can eat with you for company,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘Good!’ said You-shi. ‘I was about to suggest that.’
‘I like to see people eating together,’ said Grandmother Jia. She pointed to Butterfly.
‘Now here’s a good girl. Why shouldn’t she eat with you as well? Go on, child! Go and
eat with your mistress. As long as you are here with me, it doesn’t matter if you
break the rules for once.’
‘Come on!’ said You-shi to the maid encouragingly. ‘Don’t pretend to be bashful!’
Grandmother Jia stopped walking up and down and stood with her hands clasped
behind her back to watch them eat. It suddenly struck her that the rice being served
was the plain white rice normally eaten by the servants and that You-shi, too, was
eating it.


‘Why are you giving Mrs Zhen this stuff?’ she asked them.
‘There isn’t any of Your Old Ladyship’s rice left,’ said the maids. ‘You had an extra
young lady eating with you today, don’t forget.’
‘Meals are made to measure nowadays,’ said Faithful. ‘We can’t afford to be
extravagant the way we used to be.’
‘There have been so many floods and droughts during the past few years,’ said Lady
Wang. ‘Our farms haven’t been able to make up their quotas. These special kinds of
rice are particularly hard to come by. We have had to start rationing them rather
carefully.’
‘Even the cleverest housewife can’t make rice-gruel without rice.’ Grandmother Jia
quoted the proverb amidst general laughter.
Faithful turned to address the women waiting outside the door.
‘If Her Old Ladyship’s rice is all finished, you can get the rice that Miss Tan would
have eaten if she hadn’t been eating with us and bring it here for Mrs Zhen.’
‘No need,’ said You-shi. ‘What I’ve got here is quite enough for me.’
‘I dare say it is,’ said Faithful, ‘but what about me?’
The women hurried off to fetch the rice.
Presently Lady Wang went off to have dinner in her own apartment, leaving You-shi
to entertain Grandmother Jia. The time passed quickly, with much good-humoured
teasing and laughter, and the first watch had already begun before Grandmother Jia
noticed how late it was getting.
‘You’d better be getting back now,’ she told You-shi.
You-shi took her leave. Outside the inner gate she got into her waiting carriage. Her
women pulled the blind down, then, taking all the maids with them except Butterfly,
who was riding in the carriage with her mistress, hurried on ahead so that they could
be waiting for You-shi when she arrived in the other mansion. The men from both
gates walked some way along the street to keep it clear of pedestrians while six or
seven pages pushed and pulled the carriage (it seemed too short a distance and too
late an hour for mules) as far as the interior of the Ning-guo gateway. There the
pages retired, old women came forward and raised the blind, and Butterfly
dismounted and helped out her mistress. You-shi noticed that there were four or five
large carriages waiting below the stone lions which flanked the gate and commented
to Butterfly on their presence.
‘I wonder how many horses there are in the stables? If this number came by
carriage, you may be sure that a much greater number will have come on horseback.’
As she and Butterfly entered the outer courtyard, Jia Rong’s wife at the head of a
party of maids and older women carrying lanterns advanced to meet them.
‘I’ve been dying for I don’t know how long to have a look at the men while they are
gambling,’ said You-shi, ‘but so far I haven’t had an opportunity. Tonight is the best
chance I shall ever get. Let’s go along the wall in front of the windows so that we can
peep in at them.’
The women with lanterns made a detour towards the building in which the men
were congregated. One of them went ahead and warned the pages waiting outside
not to announce their arrival to the men or make any other noise that would warn
those inside of their coming. You-shi and her party were thus able to steal right up to
the windows and could hear everything that was going on inside. Among the medley
of sounds that met their ears, numbers seemed to predominate, some uttered
exultantly and with raucous shouts of laughter, others angrily or despairingly and to
the accompaniment of curses and profanities.
Cousin Zhen had found the ban on amusements during the seemingly interminable
period of mourning for Jia Jing which convention imposed on him extremely irksome.
Archery, for some reason, was permitted, and a few months previously he had hit on
archery as a means of getting round the ban. A number of young men from the
wealthy and aristocratic households of his acquaintance were invited round to the
Ning-guo mansion to participate. Shooting was to be competitive.
‘Random shooting is quite useless,’ he explained to them. ‘You not only don’t make
any progress; it actually spoils your form. You’ve got to have incentives of some kind
to keep you on your toes, and the best way of doing that is to bet on something.’
Butts were set up in the shooting gallery below the Celestial Fragrance Pavilion and
every day after lunch the young men came along to compete. Since, as Bereaved Son,
it would have been unseemly for Cousin Zhen himself to have been named in this
connection, the nominal convenor and organ?izer of these gatherings was Jia Rong.
All those invited were rich, profligate, dashing young fellows, accustomed to
spend?ing their time in cock-fighting, dog-racing and even more questionable
amusements. After some discussion it was decided that the responsibility for
providing dinner after the day’s archery should fall to each one of them in turn. It
became a point of honour to make these dinners as lavish as possible, so that the
daily junketings at Ning-guo House came more and more to resemble the Diet of
Lintong in the well-known play of that name, except that whereas Duke Mu’s princely
guests competed in the bravery of their com?manders and the magnificence of their
regalia, it was in the skill of their chefs and in masterpieces of culinary art that the
members of the Ning-guo archery club strove to outdo each other.
When this had been going on for a couple of weeks or so, Jia Zheng and Jia She got to
hear about it. The report that reached them cannot have been a very accurate one,
however, for, far from being critical of these goings-on, they spoke of them with
approval.
‘Since Rong obviously has no aptitude for book-learning,’ Jia Zheng observed,
‘Cousin Zhen does right to encourage him in the martial arts. The boy does, after all,
hold a military commission.
They even made Bao-yu, Jia Huan, Jia Cong and Jia Lan participate. The four of them
had to go over every day after lunch and not return until each of them had taken his
turn at the butts.
But it was not of course in the archery that Cousin Zhen was interested. On the
grounds that resting the muscles was an important part of one’s training, he was
soon advocating a little cards or dice in the evenings as a means of relaxation. At first
they played only for drinks, but soon they were play?ing more and more for money;
the time spent on gaming gradually encroached on the time devoted to archery;
betting became more open; and finally, with the formal opening of a ‘bank’ some
three or four months previously, regular, organized gambling for heavy stakes had
become a daily routine. The Ning-guo servants, who grew fat on the pickings, were
delighted with these new arrangements and, anxious that they should go on, if
possible, for ever, took very good care that no one outside the mansion should get to
hear about them.
Lady Xing’s brother, Xing De-quan, himself a keen gambler, had lately become a
frequenter of this establish?ment; so, inevitably, had Xue Pan, who was never so
happy as when he was throwing away his money.
Xing De-quan was very unlike his sister. Drinking, gambling and debauchery were his
only interests; consequently whenever any money came into his hands, he spent it
like water. The singular obtuseness he showed in all his dealings had earned him the
nickname of ‘Uncle Dumbo’. And since Xue Pan was already known to all and sundry
as ‘the Oaf King’, the two of them when they were together were referred to by the
young men as ‘Uncle Dumbo and Cousin Oaf’.
The situation when You-shi peeped inside was as follows. Cousin Oaf and Uncle
Dumbo, each with a partner, were playing six-dice Grabs on the kang in the outer
room. Simultaneously another dicing game, Driving the Sheep, was being played by
several players sitting round a large table on the floor below. The inner room, where
a slightly more intellectual group were playing Tin Kau, was devoted to dominoes.
The servants were all pages of fifteen or under. There was also a pair of male
prostitutes, powdered, over-dressed youths of seventeen or eighteen, whose duty
was to ply the guests with drink. It was this pair who first caught You-shi’s eye when
she looked in.
Xue Pan had been having the sulks earlier on because he was losing, but then his luck
had changed: he had not only recouped his losses but made a lot of extra money. He
was therefore in a very good mood indeed. Cousin Zhen sug?gested that this might
be a good point at which to stop and have dinner. They could go on playing
afterwards if they wanted to.
‘What about the two other lots?’ he inquired.
It transpired that the Tin Kau players in the next room were in process of settling up
after finishing the game and were in fact beginning to think about their dinner, but
that the group at the big table playing Driving the Sheep had not yet reached a
suitable point at which to break off. Cousin Zhen ordered dinner to be served for all
those, himself included, who were ready. Jia Rong was to wait and have dinner with
the other players when they had finished.
Xue Pan, elated by his success, sat with a cup of wine in one hand and his arm round
the shoulders of one of the pretty pot-boys. With a victor’s expansive generosity he
ordered the other boy to pour some wine ‘with his compliments’ for Uncle Dumbo.
But Uncle Dumbo was thoroughly out of temper at having lost the game, and the two
cupfuls he drank now in rapid succession served merely to make him tipsily
aggressive. He vented his anger on the two young ganymedes, who, he claimed, had
treacherously withdrawn their favours from him and transferred them to the winner.
‘Heartless brood of unnatural little whore’s gits!’ he grumbled. ‘You’ve had plenty
of favours off me in the past - and off everyone else here. Now, just because I’ve lost
a few taels, I’m not good enough for you. What makes you so certain you won’t ever
need my help again in the future?’
The other guests all knew that he was drunk. Those of them who were losers
themselves smiled wryly and said nothing, but one or two of the winners
magnanimously expressed their sympathy.
‘That’s right, Uncle. Rotten little bastards! That’s just the way they do behave.’
‘Why don’t you pour Uncle a drink and tell him you’re sorry?’ said another of them.
The two young ganymedes, practised professionals in every trick of the trade, were
on their knees at Uncle Dumbo’s side in a moment, offering him wine, fondling his
thigh, and gazing with simpering archness into his eyes.
‘Don’t be angry with us, dear old friend. We are only children. We have to do as we
are told. Our teacher always tells us, “It doesn’t matter what they are like or what
your own feelings are, the person who at any moment has the most money is the
one you must be nice to.” Just win a lot of money later on this evening, old friend,
and you’ll see how nice we shall be to you!’
The disarming frankness of this made everyone laugh. Even Uncle Dumbo, though he
tried hard not to, was forced to join in.
‘All right, I forgive you,’ he growled as he took the proffered winecup. ‘Though I
don’t mind telling you, if I hadn’t been so fond of you two, I’d have kicked the stuffing
out of your little tum-tums!’
He shot his foot up as he said this, by way of demonstration. The two boys scrambled
to their feet in mock alarm. Each of them carried a long woman’s handkerchief of
flowered silk. With mincing gestures, still holding their handkerchiefs in their hands,
they guided the winecup towards his lips. Uncle Dumbo’s loud gurgles of delight
were briefly interrupted while he threw his head back and drained the cup. Then, still
laughing, he pinched their cheeks.
‘Little dears!’ he said. ‘How I loves them!’
His mood changed abruptly as he remembered a grievance. He smote the table
angrily and glared at Cousin Zhen.
‘I had a quarrel with your Uncle She’s wife yesterday, did you know that?’
‘With Aunt Xing?’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘No, I hadn’t heard that.’
Uncle Dumbo sighed self-pityingly.
‘About damned money, as usual. You don’t know the history of our Xing family,
dear boy. When my old mother died, I was still too young to know what was going on.
I have three elder sisters. The eldest is your precious aunt. When your aunt married,
she took everything we had with her. Everything. My second sister had to marry
without a dowry. She and her husband are paupers. My third sister is still unmarried.
She lives on a pittance paid out to her by that old whore, Wang Shan-bao’s wife, who
has charge of all our money. Well, I went along yesterday to ask her for a few coppers.
Not Jia money, mind you: our Xing money is good enough for me. But would she give
me any? Not she! And that’s the reason why I get treated by you lot like a poor
relation.’
Cousin Zhen knew that he was drunk, but as it was embarrassing that these
unsavoury details of family history should be paraded in front of outsiders, he did his
best to mollify Uncle Dumbo and get him onto another tack.
All this was clearly audible to You-shi outside.
‘Did you hear that?’ she whispered to Butterfly, who was standing beside her.
‘That’s Lady Xing they’re talking about. If her own brother talks about her in that way,
you can hardly wonder that other people complain about her.’
She would have said more, but checked herself in order to attend to what was going
on inside. The group playing Driving the Sheep had now broken off and were calling
for wine.
‘Who was upsetting Uncle Dumbo just now?’ asked one of them. ‘We couldn’t
quite catch what it was about. Tell us what happened, Uncle, and we’ll see you get
fair play.’
Uncle Dumbo proceeded to tell them how the two boys had forsaken him because he
had no money.
‘Good grief!’ said the young man who had asked the question. ‘I don’t blame you
for being angry - What do you mean by it?’ he asked the boys. ‘He’s only lost a bit of
money, hasn’t he? He hasn’t lost his prick!’
The company roared with laughter. Uncle Dumbo’s mouthful of rice was spattered
over half the floor.
‘You dirty bugger!’ he said. ‘Can’t you open your mouth without being crude?’
You-shi gave a little snort of disgust.
‘Just listen to those animals! By the time they’ve swilled a few more cups of wine,
heaven knows what filth they’ll be coming out with!’
She moved on her way - having seen and heard quite as much as she wanted to -
returned to her apartment, un?dressed, and went to bed. Cousin Zhen did not get to
bed until after two. He spent what remained of the night in Lovey’s room.
As soon as he was up next morning, someone came in with a message to say that the
melons and mooncakes he had ordered were now ready and it only remained for him
to say who they were to be sent to.
‘Ask your mistress to see to it,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘I have got other business to
attend to.’
Lovey took this message to You-shi, who proceeded to go through the list deciding
how much should go to whom and making arrangements for the delivery. She had
barely finished doing this when Lovey came back again with another message.
‘The master wants to know if you are going out today, madam. He says we can’t
keep Mid-Autumn properly on the fifteenth because we are in mourning still, but
there would be no harm in having a little family party tonight.’
‘I don’t want to go out,’ said You-shi, ‘but with Mrs Zhu and Mrs Lian both ill in bed,
I don’t see how I can refuse to go next door and lend a hand.’
‘The master says, if you have to go out, will you at any rate try to get back as early
as you can?’ said Lovey.
‘Better hurry up with the lunch then,’ said You-shi. ‘The sooner I can get away, the
sooner I’ll be back.’
‘The master’s having lunch in the front today, madam. He says please have your
lunch here without him.’
‘Who’s he got there?’ said You-shi.
‘Somebody told me it’s two people just arrived from Nan-king,’ said Lovey, ‘but I
don’t know who they are.’
Jia Rong’s wife came in while Lovey was talking. Shortly after that lunch was served.
After lunch, You-shi changed into her going-out clothes and went over to Rong-guo
House. She did not return until evening.
While she was away, Cousin Zhen went ahead with arrange?ments for an intimate
family party. He had a whole pig boiled, a whole sheep roasted, and an infinite
number of vegetable dishes and entremets prepared. When You-shi got back that
evening, he conducted her and the little con?cubines and Jia Rong and Jia Rong’s wife
to the Bosky Verdure Pavilion where it was all laid out. This was in the All-Scents
Garden, as they continued to call the little rem?nant still left them after the main
part was incorporated in Prospect Garden.
They had dinner first. The wine was brought in after they had finished eating, so that
they could apply themselves single-mindedly to games and mirth and the enjoyment
of the Mid-Autumn moon, which now (for by this time it was already the beginning
of the first watch) shone brightly in a clear, fresh sky, filling the world above and
below with its silver light. Cousin Zhen invited the four little concubines to sit at the
same table as him and You-shi and join with them in games of Plumstones and
Guess-fingers. Presently – for the drink was beginning to make him sentimental - he
called to them for some music, and Flower sang for them in a clear, sweet voice,
accompanied by Lovey on the vertical bamboo flute. Everyone was deeply moved by
the perform?ance. After it was over the games continued.
The hours slipped by. Soon it was nearly midnight. Cousin Zhen was by now more
than a little drunk. They had all just put on some extra clothes and had some hot tea;
the wine-cups had been cleared and clean ones put in their place and a fresh lot of
newly heated wine was just being poured, when suddenly a long-drawn-out sigh was
heard from the foot of one of the garden walls. It was heard by all of them, quite
clearly and unmistakably, and they could feel the hair on their scalps rise as they
listened to it.
‘Who’s there?’ Cousin Zhen shouted in a voice that he tried to make fierce and
challenging. But though he repeated the question several times, there was no reply.
‘It’s probably one of the servants,’ said You-shi.
‘Nonsense!’ snapped Cousin Zhen. ‘There are no servants living behind any of these
walls. In any case, that’s the Hall of the Ancestors over there. What would anyone be
doing behind that wall?’
A rustle of wind passed, at that very moment, along the foot of it and a distant sound
like the opening and closing of a door could be heard from inside the ancestral
temple. An oppressive feeling of dread came over them; the night air seemed
suddenly to have grown colder; the moon appeared less bright than it had been a
few minutes before; and they could feel their skins crawling with terror.
Shock had made Cousin Zhen almost sober; but though he managed to keep better
control of himself than the others, he was very much shaken and had lost all appetite
for enjoy?ment. Nevertheless he forced himself and the others to sit a little longer
before retiring finally to bed.
He rose quite early next morning. It was the fifteenth, one of the two days in each
month on which offerings have to be made to the ancestors. Entering the ancestral
temple with the other male members of the family, he took the opportunity of
looking round inside it very carefully; but everything was as it should be; there was
no sign whatever of anything untoward having happened. He put down the previous
night’s terror to the effects of drunkenness - a mild attack of the horrors - and
resolved to make no further mention of it. When the service was over, he shut the
temple up again and made sure that the doors were securely locked and barred.
*
After dinner that evening Cousin Zhen went over with You?-shi to Rong-guo House.
He found Jia She and Jia Zheng in Grandmother Jia’s room. The two of them were
sitting on the kang, talking and laughing with the old lady, while Jia Lian, Bao-yu, Jian
Huan and Jia Lan stood on the floor below. After greeting them and exchanging a
word or two with each of them in turn, he sat, or rather half-sat, in polite discomfort,
on a stool next to the door. Grandmother Jia vouchsafed a gracious smile in his
direction.
     ‘How is your Cousin Bao’s archery these days?’
Cousin Zhen jumped to his feet to reply.
‘Greatly improved, Lady Jia. It isn’t only his form that is better; he is beginning to
handle the bow with much greater strength.’
‘That’s the point at which to stop then,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘We don’t want him
straining himself.’
‘No, no, certainly not,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘I quite agree.’
‘Those mooncakes you sent yesterday were very good,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘The
melons looked all right, but there’s not much inside them when you cut them open.’
‘Those mooncakes are good, aren’t they?’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘They were made by
our new pastry-cook. I tried them myself to make sure they were all right before
venturing to send you any. As for the melons: we’ve been lucky in previous years, but
for some reason none of them this year seem to be any good.’
‘I think we must blame the weather,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘The rains this year were
excessive.
‘The moon must be up by now,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Let’s go and make our
Mid-Autumn offering.’
She got up and, leaning on Bao-yu’s shoulder, led the way into the Garden. The main
gate was wide open and hung with great horn lanterns. When they reached Prospect
Hall, they found servants with lighted lamps waiting for them on the terrace and a
table on which incense smoked in a square container and on which offerings of
melons and other fruit and mooncakes had been set out on dishes. Lady Xing and all
the other female members of the family were waiting inside the hall.
  Moonlight and lanterns gleaming pale
Through a thin aromatic veil –
It was indeed a scene of indescribable beauty. A carpet for kneeling on had been laid
on the terrace at the foot of the table on the side nearest the hall. Grandmother Jia
washed her hands, lit some sticks of incense, knelt down on the carpet, bowed down,
and offered up the incense. The others followed her example.
‘The best place for enjoying the moon from is the top of a hill,’ she told them when
they had finished. She suggested the pavilion on the summit of the ‘master
mountain’ behind Reunion Palace (of which Prospect Hall was a part) as the place to
have their party. The servants at once went off to make it ready. Meanwhile
Grandmother Jia sat talking with the others inside Prospect Hall, resting and drinking
tea. Presently the servants came back to report that the mountain-top pavilion was
now ready. The old lady stood up again and, supported on either side by her maids,
prepared to make the ascent.
‘I’m afraid the moss on the steps might make them rather slippery,’ said Lady Wang.
‘Wouldn’t it be better if you went up in a chair?’
‘The servants sweep them every day,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘How can there be any
moss? They are good, level steps and not too steep. The exercise will be good for
me.’
Jia She and Jia Zheng led the way, followed by a couple of old women with horn
lanterns. Faithful, Amber and You-shi supported the old lady on either side, and Lady
Xing, Lady Wang and all the others followed in a close procession behind. It was only
a hundred or so steps up the zig-zag path to the summit.
The pavilion was a rectangular building with one completely open side looking onto a
terrace. Because it was situated on the convex grassy summit of the little ‘mountain’,
it was called Convex Pavilion. Two tables with chairs round them had been set out on
the terrace, separated from each other by a large screen. The tables and chairs, like
the moon and melons and mooncakes, were all round, in honour of the occasion.
Grandmother Jia sat at the head of one of the tables with Jia She, Cousin Zhen, Jia
Lian and Jia Rong on her left hand and Jia Zheng, Bao-yu, Jia Huan and Jia Lan on her
right. Between them they filled only about half the places round the table.
‘I never felt in the past on these occasions that we were a small family,’
Grandmother Jia commented. ‘Looking at us today, though, I must say we do make a
very miserable turn?out. I can remember Mid-Autumns when there were thirty or
forty of us sitting down together. Ah, what times we had then! We shan’t ever have
numbers like that again. Let’s have the girls to sit with us. See if we can’t fill up that
gap!’
Someone went over to the table presided over by Lady Xing on the other side of the
screen to fetch Ying-chun, Tan?-chun and Xi-chun. Jia Lian, Jia Rong, Bao-yu and the
other boys got up while the chairs were rearranged and the girls were installed at the
table. Then they reseated themselves in their proper order, Jia Lian and Jia Rong with
Ying-chun and Xi-chun between them, and Bao-yu and Jia Huan on either side of
Tan-chun.
Grandmother Jia asked someone to fetch a spray of cassia and made one of the
women sit behind the screen and drum for them, so that they could play Passing the
Branch. Anyone whose hand the branch was in when the drumming stopped had first
to drink a cup of wine and then tell a funny story. The drumming started and the
branch passed from Grandmother Jia to Jia She and so on round the table. It stopped
just as the branch had reached Jia Zheng’s hand on its second time round. He raised
the winecup to his lips to the accom?paniment of much secret nudging and pinching
among the younger folk, to whom the notion of Jia Zheng telling a joke was in itself
unbelievably funny.
Jia Zheng could see how much the old lady was enjoying herself and was anxious not
to spoil her pleasure. Before he could begin his story, however, she saw fit to give
him notice that he must expect to be punished if he did not make her laugh.
‘I can only think of one joke,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘If you don’t find it amusing, you will
just have to punish me.’
‘Very well, tell us your one joke then,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘It is about a hen-pecked husband,’ said Jia Zheng.
He got no further. Already his audience were convulsed. It was not that what he had
said was the least bit funny, simply that they had never heard him talking about such
things before.
‘This is sure to be good,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘In that case,’ said Jia Zheng, laughing himself, ‘let me persuade you to drink a cup
of wine.’
‘Very well,’ said Grandmother Jia.
At once Jia She and Jia Zheng rose to their feet. Jia She held a winecup in both his
hands while Jia Zheng poured wine into it from a wine-kettle. Then Jia Zheng took
the cup from Jia She and ceremoniously set it down in front of Grandmother Jia. The
two men stood in stiffly deferential attitudes beside her while she drank some, then,
having completed their little pantomime, resumed their places.
Jia Zheng proceeded with his story.
‘This hen-pecked husband was so afraid of his wife that he never dared stay long
away from the house. But one Mid-Autumn Festival he chanced to be out shopping
in the street when a friend caught sight of him and insisted on dragging him off to his
house for a drink. Without meaning to, the husband became very drunk - so much so
that he had to stay at his friend’s house for the night. When he woke up the next
morning, he was full of remorse. However, there was nothing for it but to hurry back
home and apologize. When he got back, his wife was washing her feet.
“‘Very well,” she said when he had finished apologizing, “if you will lick my feet
clean, I will forgive you.”
‘The man began to lick, but a feeling of nausea overcame him and he showed signs
of wanting to be sick. When his wife saw this, she was furious.
“‘How dare you?” she screamed, and looked as if she was about to give him a
beating.
‘The husband knelt down in terror and begged to be forgiven.
“‘Please, my dear! It isn’t that I find your feet in the least distasteful. It’s just that I
drank rather a lot of yellow wine last night and ate lots of very rich mooncakes, so
today I am feeling a little queasy.”’
Grandmother Jia and the rest all laughed and Jia Zheng poured Grandmother Jia
another cup of wine.
‘Someone had better change this yellow wine for samshoo,’ she said. ‘We don’t
want you husbands having this sort of trouble with your wives tomorrow!’
        This produced another laugh.
        The drumming recommenced and the branch, starting from Jia Zheng, began
circulating again. This time it stopped with Bao-yu. Bao-yu had been feeling
uncomfortable to start with because of Jia Zheng’s presence, but became ten times
more so when he found himself stuck with the branch.
      ‘If I tell a joke and it’s no good,’ he thought, ‘he will say I’ve no invention. But if I
tell a good one, he’ll say I have no aptitude for serious things, only frivolous ones,
and that will be even worse. I’d much better not tell one at all.’
      Having reached this decision, he stood up and asked his father to excuse him.
      ‘I’m sorry,’ he said, ‘I can’t tell jokes. May I do something else, please?’
      ‘You may compose a poem on the theme of “Mid-Autumn Moon”,’ said Jia Zheng.
‘If it is good, I shall reward you; if it is not - I shall deal with you tomorrow.’
      ‘This is a game we are playing,’ said Grandmother Jia testily. ‘Do you have to
make the boy write poetry?’
‘He can do it if he wants to,’ said Jia Zheng. He was smiling.
‘Very well, let him do it then,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Fetch him a brush and. paper
somebody.’
‘No padding, now!’ Jia Zheng told Bao-yu. ‘No “crystal”, “ice”, “jade”, “silver”, “light”,
“bright”, “white” - anything of that sort. I want something original that will give me
some idea of what you have been doing with your mind during this past year or two.’
Bao-yu found these injunctions by no means uncongenial, and having succeeded, in
quite a short time, in thinking of a quatrain, he wrote it out and handed it to his
father. Jia Zheng said nothing, but was observed to nod after he had finished reading
it, which Grandmother Jia interpreted to mean that he could not have found the
poem too bad.
‘Well?’ she asked him.
Jia Zheng wanted to make her happy.
‘Not at all bad,’ he said. ‘It’s a pity he won’t study, but his verses are really quite
elegant.’
‘Well, that’s all right then,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You ought to encourage the boy,
so that next time he tries even harder.’
‘You are quite right,’ said Jia Zheng. He turned to one of the old women in
attendance. ‘Tell my boys to get out two of the fans I brought back with me from the
South, will you, and give them to Bao-yu for me.’
Bao-yu came forward and kotowed. After he had gone back to his seat, the game
continued. This time the branch stop?ped in Jia She’s hand. He drank his wine and
then told the following story.
‘This one is about a dutiful son whose mother was ill. He tried everywhere to get a
doctor for her, but couldn’t find one, so in the end he was reduced to calling in an old
woman who practised acupuncture. Now this old dame knew nothing of physiology,
nevertheless she assured the son that it was inflammation of the heart that his
mother was suffering from and that she could cure it instantly with her needle. The
son became very alarmed.
“‘If metal in any form comes into contact with the heart,” he said, “it means death.
Surely you’re not going to put a needle in her heart?”
“‘No, no, I shan’t put it in the heart,” said the old woman. “I mean to put it in here,
over the ribs.”
“‘But that’s too far from the heart,” said the son. “Surely if you put it in there, it
won’t do any good?”
“‘Oh yes it will,” said the old woman. “A mother’s heart always inclines towards
one side.”’
The others all laughed, and Grandmother Jia was persuaded to drink another half cup
of wine. After a long pause she said somewhat wryly,
‘Perhaps I could do with a bit of the old dame’s acupuncture myself.’
Jia She realized, too late, that his somewhat tactless choice of story could be
interpreted as a criticism of his own mother. Hurriedly rising to his feet, he held up
his cup to toast her with and did what he could to change the subject. Fortunately
the old lady made no further reference to his gaffe and the game soon continued.
This time the branch stopped with Jia Huan.
Jia Huan had lately been making modest progress in his studies. He was even
beginning to show a certain interest in verse, though his tastes in it were decidedly
peculiar. When Bao-yu’s poem was praised earlier on, he had been dying to
demonstrate his own talent, but had not dared risk the charge of showing off in his
father’s presence. Now that the luck of the game had given him free licence, he
called for paper and writing-brush and, in a matter of moments, wrote out a quatrain
which he handed to his father. Jia Zheng was not impressed. It was a somewhat weird
little poem, and whatever advances Jia Huan might lately have made in his
schoolwork, they certainly did not reveal them?selves in his choice of words.
‘It is easy to see that you and Bao-yu are brothers,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Whether in your
ideas or the language you express them in, you show the same distaste for sound
classical models. The “Two Incomparables” we should call you, not because you are
incomparable in virtue like Chen Yuan-fang and his brother, but because you are
incomparably hard to knock any sense into: though whereas Bao-yu seems to think
that he has inherited the mantle of the Airy Fairy school and fancies himself as a
second Wen Ting-yun, you apparently prefer the Spooks and Spectres style of poetry
and see yourself as a latter-day Cao Tang.’
This (not because anyone understood it, but because it sounded funny) provoked
general laughter.
‘Let me see that poem,’ said Jia She. He took it from Jia Zheng and almost
immediately began praising it.
‘I like this poem, it’s got guts in it. Boys from families like ours don’t need to read
themselves half blind in order to get started on a career. Provided they’ve read
enough to show that they are better educated than the rabble and are capable of
holding down a job, they can hardly fail to get on. Why waste a lot of time and
energy on turning the boy into a book-worm? What I like about this poem is that it is
just the sort of good amateur, not-too-brainy poem you’d expect a young chap of our
class to write.’
He sent someone to fetch various objects of his to give to Jia Huan as a reward and
smilingly patted him on the head.
‘You go on writing poems like this, young fellow! We’ll have no trouble getting you
a posting when the time comes, don’t you worry!’
Jia Zheng protested.
‘Whatever you think of the poem, it hardly justifies talking in this way about the
boy’s future.’
Meanwhile the servants had begun pouring more wine so that the game could
continue; but Grandmother Jia intervened.
‘Why don’t you two go now? I’m sure your gentlemen must be waiting for you, and
it would be discourteous to neglect them. Besides, it must be all of ten o’clock and if
you go now it will give the children a chance to enjoy them?selves unconstrainedly
for a while before they go to bed.’
The two brothers at once got up to go, and after a parting cup offered to them on
behalf of all the rest, they went off, taking Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian with them, but
leaving Bao?yu and the two younger boys with the womenfolk.
What happened after their departure will be related in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 76

Flute-playing at Convex Pavilion provokes
too much melancholy
And linked verses at Concave Pavilion betray
a morbid sensitivity



After Jia She and Jia Zheng had left, taking the two younger men with them,
Grandmother Jia had the screen removed and proposed that those sitting at both
tables should combine to make a single party. The serving-women cleared and wiped
the table, replenished and replaced the plates of foodstuff, and set out clean
winecups and chopsticks. While they were doing this, Grandmother Jia and the other
members of the family were putting on more clothing, washing their hands; rinsing
their mouths out, and drinking tea. When all was ready they arranged themselves
round the one table. As they did so, Grandmother Jia noticed, for the first time that
evening, that Bao-chai and Bao-qin were not there. With Li Wan and Xi-feng also
away ill, the family gathering seemed sadly depleted. She commented on this fact to
Lady Wang.
‘In past years, when Sir Zheng was away, we invited your sister to enjoy the
Mid-Autumn moon with us. To be sure, we had some very happy times with her, but
the recollection that one of our dear ones was missing - in my case a son, in yours a
husband, in the children’s a father somewhat dampened our enjoyment. This year,
now that he is back, I was looking forward to a really jolly family party; but now,
unfortunately, it’s your sister and her children who can’t be with us. Well, I suppose
as she’s got two more members of her family with her this year we could hardly
expect her to leave them behind and come over here simply to keep me amused. But
what a pity that Feng should have chosen this time to be ill! She is always such a
tonic as good as ten other people at a party! It only goes to show. One can’t have
everything.’
She sighed.
‘Fetch me a bigger cup,’ she said presently, ‘and pour me some good hot wine.’
Lady Wang smiled.
‘You have both your sons with you this year, Mother. Surely that is a gain? There
may have been more females present in previous years, but surely having all your
own children about you is better?’
‘Yes, yes, of course it is,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I am happy. That is why I have asked
for a larger cup. You must all have larger cups too.’
It was getting very late now and the other ladies had no real inclination for carousing;
but as Grandmother Jia showed no signs of flagging, they were obliged to keep her
company. The effect of forcing themselves to drink with her was that they became
unbearably sleepy.
Grandmother Jia called for a carpet to be spread out at the top of the terrace steps.
The remaining mooncakes, melons and other eatables were carried over there and
the maids and womenservants invited to sit round in a big circle, eating them and
enjoying the moon.
Grandmother Jia, too, looked up at the moon. It had now reached its meridian and
was even clearer and more beautiful than it had been earlier in the evening.
‘To get full enjoyment of so fine a moon,’ she said, ‘the music of a flute is
indispensable.’
She had the girls of the family’s little ten-piece orchestra summoned; but when they
arrived, they were informed that not all of them would be required to play.
‘Too much sound would spoil the effect,’ she said. ‘The flute on its own will be
enough. And we should like to hear it from quite a long way away.’
The flautist went off obediently to do her bidding. A moment after she had left, one
of Lady Xing’s women came hurrying up and whispered something in Lady Xing’s ear.
‘What is it?’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘It’s Sir She,’ said Lady Xing. ‘On his way back just now he tripped over a rock and
twisted his ankle.’
Grandmother Jia at once sent two of her own women to see how he was and told
Lady Xing that she was to go back immediately and look after him. Lady Xing rose and
took her leave.
‘Zhen’s wife may as well go back now too,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Then I shall go
home to bed.’
‘I don’t intend to go back at all tonight,’ said You-shi. ‘I have resolved to spend the
night here with you.’
‘That will never do!’ said Grandmother Jia, laughing. ‘Tonight of all nights a young
couple like you ought to be together. I can’t have you staying away from your
husband for my sake!’
You-shi coloured.
‘Really, Grandma, what a thing to say! I suppose Zhen and I are still comparatively
young, but we have been married nearly twenty years, you know: we are both nearly
forty. And in any case, we’re still in mourning for Sir Jing. I’d much better spend the
night here with you.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’d quite forgotten you were still in mourning.
Poor Sir Jing! It must be more than two years now - but I ought not to have forgotten.
I shall drink this big cupful as a punishment! All right, you’d better stay and keep me
company then. Let Rong’s wife see Lady Xing out. After that, she can go back home
herself.’
You-shi instructed her daughter-in-law accordingly, where?upon little Hu-shi
accompanied Lady Xing as far as the main gate of the mansion. There both ladies got
into their carriages and went their separate ways.
Meanwhile the company had been over to the other side of the terrace to admire the
cassia. They now took their places at table once more and were served with freshly
heated wine.
In the midst of their chattering and laughter, suddenly startling them into silence, the
undulant, lamenting sound of a flute came floating up to them from the cassia-trees
below. Beautiful at any time, such music heard in the stillness of the night under the
great vault of the sky with a bright moon above and only the cold, invisible night
wind stirring in the earth below steals like a balm over the soul, soothing and
dissolving all earthly griefs and cares. They listened, rapt and silent, with upturned,
attentive faces. The music continued for about the space in which one could
comfortably have drunk two cups of tea and then stopped. The momentary silence
which followed it was broken by cries of admiration from all present. The winecups
were replenished with warm wine.
‘You see,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It is good, isn’t it?’
‘It truly is,’ they agreed. ‘Who could have imagined anything so beautiful? If it
weren’t for you, Grandma, we might never have had this experience.’
‘It could have been much better,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘To get the full benefit you
need to hear something really slow.’
She had a large cup of wine poured and ordered one of her women to take it to the
flautist.
‘Tell her to take her time with this, and say that when she’s finished drinking it, I’d
like her to play us another piece, only more softly this time.’
While this woman went off with the message and the wine, the two women she had
sent off earlier to inquire after Jia She’s ankle returned.
‘We’ve had a look at Sir She, Your Ladyship. His right ankle is rather swollen, but
he’s taken some medicine and the pain is not so bad now. It doesn’t look very
serious.’
Grandmother Jia nodded and sighed.
‘You see? The truth is, I worry too much. He was trying to make out that I don’t
care about him at all!’
While she was saying this, Faithful appeared carrying a large cape and hood.
‘Here, put these on,’ she said. ‘It’s getting very late. You don’t want to be outside
when the dew falls. Aren’t you afraid of catching cold? I think when you’ve sat a little
longer, you ought to come back home to bed.’
‘Just when I’m enjoying myself you have to start nagging me to go to bed,’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘I hope you don’t think I’m drunk. I’ve decided to stay up till dawn.’
She called rebelliously for more wine, but did put the cape and hood on
notwithstanding. The other ladies drank with her for company and did their best to
be amusing. Then, silencing them once more, the sound of the flute concealed in the
cassia-bushes below came stealing into their ears, this time more plaintive even than
before. Indeed, this time the combination of the flute’s melancholy with the effects
of nocturnal stillness and ghostly moonlight induced a feeling of such over?powering
sadness in the listeners that they turned their backs on it and sought, with talk and
somewhat forced laughter, to escape it. Fresh wine was called for and the flautist told
to stop playing.
‘I’ll cheer you up, Lady Jia,’ said You-shi. ‘Let me tell you a funny story. I learnt it
specially for the occasion.’
‘Ha, ha, ha. Yes, that would be very nice, a joke. Do tell me,’ said Grandmother Jia
with a jollity that seemed somewhat strained.
‘There were once four brothers,’ You-shi began. ‘The eldest had only one eye, the
second had only one ear, the third had only one nostril, and the fourth, though he
had all his parts in order, was dumb.’
She had got no farther with her story when she became aware that the old lady’s
head was nodding down upon her bosom and her eyelids drooping as though she
was about to go to sleep. She broke off at once, and she and Lady Wang both called
gently to her to wake up. Grandmother Jia opened her eyes wide and laughed.
‘I’m not sleeping, I was just resting my eyes. Go on with your story. I’m listening.’
‘It’s very late,’ said Lady Wang. ‘The air is cold tonight and there is a lot of dew.
Won’t you go home and rest now, Mother? We can have another moon-party
tomorrow night, if you feel like it. The moon on the sixteenth is still well worth
watching.’
‘What time is it?’ Grandmother Jia asked.
‘Past two o’clock,’ said Lady Wang. ‘The children couldn’t hold out any longer. They
have all gone off to bed.’
Grandmother Jia looked round the table. Only Tan-chun was still sitting there in the
semicircle of empty chairs.
‘Well,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘they are not used to staying up late. Considering the
amount of weakness and sickliness there is among them, I suppose it is just as well.
But there’s my little Tan, sitting there all on her own, poor child! You go to bed too,
my dear. We’ll end the party now.’
She got up herself as she said this, and after taking a sip or two of green tea, climbed
into her bamboo carrying-chair and was borne out of the Garden by two women, the
rest walking beside her or following close behind. But of her and them no more.
One of the women who remained behind to clear the table and stack the crockery
noticed that a single porcelain cup was missing. After looking everywhere for it
unsuccessfully, she appealed to the other servants.
‘I suppose one of you must have dropped it accidentally and thrown it away
somewhere. Do please tell us, and let us have the broken pieces, so that when we
report the loss we shan’t be accused of having stolen it.’
‘None of us has broken it,’ said the others. ‘It might have been a maid of one of the
young ladies that broke it. If you can think who it might have been, I should go and
ask them.’
‘You are right,’ said the woman, suddenly recollecting. ‘I remember Kingfisher
coming to fetch a cup for her mistress. I must go and ask her for it.’
She had not far to look. A short way along the paved path at the bottom of the steps
she came upon her and Nightingale walking along together. It was Kingfisher who
spoke first.
‘Oh, has Her Old Ladyship ended the party then? I suppose you don’t know where
my mistress has gone?’
‘I’ve come to ask you what you’ve done with one of our teacups,’ said the woman,
‘and you ask me about your mistress!’
Kingfisher laughed.
‘I poured out a cup of tea some time ago and handed it to her, and the next thing I
knew was she’d disappeared - with the teacup.’
‘Her Ladyship said just now that the young ladies had all gone to bed,’ said the
woman. ‘I don’t know where you two can have been larking about all this time not to
know anything about it.’
‘I’m sure our mistresses wouldn’t have slipped off to bed without telling us,’ said
Kingfisher. ‘More likely they just went off for a walk. Perhaps when Her Old Ladyship
left they joined the others to see her back to her apartment. We’ll go over there now
and have a look. If they are there, we shall know where your cup is. Why don’t you
come round and ask me for it tomorrow? There’s no pressing hurry for it now, is
there?’
‘There’s no hurry as long as I know where it is,’ said the woman. ‘I’ll call round and
ask you for it tomorrow.’
She went back to the pavilion then, to finish stacking the crockery.
*
Lady Wang was wrong. Dai-yu and Xiang-yun had not gone to bed. The sight of all
those Jias enjoying the moonlight (in spite of Grandmother Jia’s complaint that the
numbers were so few) and the thought of Bao-chai and Bao-qin enjoying a
moon-party of their own with Aunt Xue and the two Xue males made the occasion a
painful one for Dai-yu. She had slipped away not in order to go to bed but to lean on
the terrace railings and cry. Bao-yu on this occasion had little thought for anything
but Skybright’s illness, which had lately taken a serious turn for the worse, and after
several appeals from his mother to go to bed, he had availed himself of the excuse
for going back in order to find out how she was. Tan?chun was still feeling too much
out of temper after the recent domestic upheavals to have any appetite for
amusement. Ying-chun and Xi-chun might have kept Dai-yu company, but since they
did not as a rule get on with her very well, it would not have occurred to them to do
so. That left only Xiang-yun to offer her some comfort.
‘Now coz, this won’t do! You’re an intelligent girl: you must take more care of
yourself. I must say, it is too bad of Chai and Qin. All that talk about spending
Mid-Autumn night enjoying the moon together and using the occasion to revive the
Poetry Club with another linked couplets session - and then, when the time comes,
they leave us in the lurch and go off to enjoy the moon by themselves! No Poetry
Club, no linked couplets, nothing! It’s all the fault of those wretched men! You
remember the remark made by the first Song emperor: “No one but me is allowed to
snore in this bed?room!” That’s the menfolk’s attitude at a party. Never mind. Since
the others haven’t come, we’ll make up some linked couplets ourselves and take
them along tomorrow to shame them with.’
Xiang-yun was so enthusiastic a comforter that Dai-yu felt she could not show herself
wholly unresponsive.
‘The trouble is, all these people here are making so much noise,’ she said. ‘It’s not
an atmosphere very conducive to poetic inspiration.’
‘Although the hilltop is a good place for enjoying the moon from,’ said Xiang-yun,
‘the moon would look even better over water. I don’t know whether you realize it,
but one side of this hill does actually give onto the lake. There is a little building there
called the Concave Pavilion nestling in a hollow quite close to the water’s edge.
Whoever made this Garden must have been quite an educated person. The place
where we are now is obviously called the Convex Pavilion because it is on top of the
convex hill, and Concave Pavilion must have been given its name because it is in a
hollow. Those two words “concave” and “convex” are very seldom encountered in
literature. Their use in landscape gardening for the naming of features must be even
rarer. To my mind the linking together of these two pavilions by so unusual a pair of
names suggests that they must have been specially designed for viewing the moon
from: Convex Pavilion for those who like the small, remote moon of the mountains
and high places, Concave Pavilion for those who prefer the silky whiteness of the
great orb reflected in the surface of the water. “Convex” and “concave” are often
thought of as vulgar, unpoetical words, but that is only because of their modern
associations. Some people even call that well-known line of Lu You’s vulgar:
In well-worn concave patch the ground ink settles;
but I find that criticism rather silly.’
‘Lu You is by no means the only writer to have used those words in a work of
literature,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Jiang Yan uses them in his prose-poem “Moss”, Dong-fang
Shuo uses them somewhere in his Book of Marvels, and in Lives of the Painters they
turn up in a description of Zhang Seng-yao’s decoration of the Ekayāna Monastery at
Nanking. In fact, there must be countless instances in literature. I think it’s merely
ignorance that nowadays leads people to dismiss them as “unpoetical”. To tell you
the truth, it was I who gave these two pavilions their names. That year when Bao-yu
did all the naming of places in the Garden there were several places left over
afterwards which he either hadn’t got round to naming or had given names to that
were thought unsuitable, and the task of naming them was given to us girls. The
names we made up were taken to the Palace for Cousin Yuan’s approval and she sent
word back saying that provided Uncle Zheng approved of them they were to be used.
So that’s how I came to name these two pavilions. All right, let’s go down then.’
The two girls descended the slope of the little mountain. A few steps round a turn in
the pathway which skirted the foot of it took them to the pavilion. Near the water’s
edge, linking it with Lotus Pavilion farther along the shore, was a bamboo railing. The
two old women who were on night watch in it, little imagining that an overspill from
the hilltop party would come their way, had long since put their light out and gone to
sleep. Dai-yu and Xiang-yun laughed when they saw that the pavilion was in
darkness.
‘They’ve gone to sleep. Never mind. All the better. Let’s sit outside here on the
covered verandah and look at the moonlight on the water.’
They found a couple of drum-shaped bamboo stools to sit down on. A great white
moon in the water reflected the great white moon above, competing with it in
brightness. The girls felt like mermaids sitting in a shining crystal palace beneath the
sea. A little wind that brushed over the surface of the water making tiny ripples
seemed to cleanse their souls and fill them with buoyant lightness.
‘If only I were in a boat now, with some wine to drink!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘If this were
my own home, I should jump into a boat now immediately.’
‘There’s an old saying: “Who seeks perfection must abandon joy”,’ said Dai-yu. ‘If
you ask me, I think we are very well the way we are. Why do we have to be in a boat
to enjoy this?’
Xiang-yun laughed.
“‘One conquest breeds appetite for another.” That applies to most of us, you know,
not only to generals.’
While she was speaking, a flute began to play. They listened for some moments to its
plaintive rise and fall.
‘Grandma and Aunt Wang are obviously enjoying themselves,’ said Dai-yu, smiling.
The flute is a very happy touch. We shall put it to our own purposes, you and I. It
shall inspire our verse. We both like pentameters, don’t we? Let’s do linked
pentameters as we did on that other occasion.’
‘What rhyme?’ said Xiang-yun.
‘We could use a number for a rhyme,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Let’s count the uprights in the
railing as far as that angle over there. Whatever the number is shall be our rhyme.’
‘That’s a very ingenious idea,’ said Xiang-yun.
The two girls got up and walked along the railing to count. It turned out that there
were exactly eight posts from one angle of the railing to the next.
‘Hmn,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Eight. I wonder how far we shall get with that rhyme. The
danger with this sort of thing always is that after a time the rhyming becomes forced
- or else one simply can’t go on at all. Well, you begin.’
‘I’d like to have been able to see afterwards which of us had done better,’ said
Dai-yu, ‘but unfortunately we haven’t got anything to write with.’
‘I’ll write it out tomorrow,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘I may not be very clever, but I’ve got a
reasonably good memory.’
‘All right,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’ll start with something very prosy and obvious.’

DAI-YU:
Fifteenth night of the Eighth, Mid-Autumn moon -

Xiang-yun thought a bit before following.

XIANG-YUN:
Whose joys the First Full Moon’s do emulate,
Under your crystal-constellated heaven -

DAI-TU:
The sounds of music everywhere pulsate.
At many a hoard the reckless winecups fly –


‘Ha! I like the “reckless winecups”,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘I must try to do them justice.
Let me see.’
She thought for a bit.

XIANG-YUN:
Where friends are met your feast to celebrate.
The air is crisp, the wind more bracing blows –


‘You finished the couplet very well,’ said Dai-yu, ‘but that second line is a bit weak,
isn’t it?’
    ‘We’ve got a long way to go and the rhyming will soon begin to get harder,’ said
Xiang-yun. ‘I want to save up any good ideas I may have until later.’
‘Mind you produce some good lines later then,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Otherwise you are
going to look pretty silly!’
She proceeded to finish the couplet.

DAI-YU:
In the clear sky the cold stars scintillate.
Grey hairs are mocked when they for cakes dispute -’

I don’t like that line,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘It sounds like an allusion, but I think you have
just made it up to confuse me.’
‘That shows you don’t read much,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It’s a perfectly good allusion.
There’s a story about quarrelling over cakes in the Official history of the Tang Dynasty.
I’ll show you it tomorrow.’
‘Well, anyway, I’m not going to be confused,’ said Xiang yun. ‘I can cap that line.’

XIANG-YUN:
Green girls divide the melons, eight and eight.
New scents the jade-like cassia have enriched -’


‘Now that really is a bogus allusion,’ said Dai-yu.
‘We’ll look both our allusions up tomorrow and the others can judge between us,’
said Xiang-yun. ‘In the meanwhile, let’s get on with this and stop wasting time.’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Dai-yu, ‘but I don’t like your other line either. We ought to
be able to manage without clichés like “lade-like cassia”. I call that mere padding.’

DAI-YU:
Closed day-lilies the morrow’s gold gestate.
A blaze of candles gilds the radiant feasters –


“‘Gold gestate”!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Well, that’s one way of getting a rhyme - a pretty
cheap one if you ask me! And your second line is quite as much padding as mine
was.’
‘If you hadn’t started with “jade-like cassia”, I shouldn’t have brought in my
gold-gestating day-lilies,’ said Dai-yu. ‘And as regards my second line, I should have
thought a few words on the brilliance of the feast were called for, in order to do
justice to the occasion.’
Since Dai-yu was evidently not going to concede anything, Xiang-yun was obliged to
finish off the couplet.

XIANG-YUN:
Whom frequent sconcings soon inebriate.
Competing, they observe the game’s strict order –


‘Ah, that’s a good line!’ said Dai-yu.
She thought a bit before capping it.

DAI-YU:
And rules for ‘I spy’ gravely promulgate.
Some shake the pretty dice and make them roll –


‘I like “gravely promulgate”,’ said Xiang-yun, laughing. ‘It lifts a vulgar subject up
and gives it tone. But then your “dice” in the next line bring us back again to the
banal.’
She followed as best she could.

XIANG-YUN:
Or, to the drum’s quick beat, the branch rotate.
The clear rays glint on roofs and courts below -
‘Well capped!’ said Dai-yu. ‘But then in your next line you wander off the track. Is
that the best you can do, padding out with that stuff about moonlight?’
‘In point of fact we haven’t said much about the moon yet,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Surely
a few words on the subject are in order? Isn’t that what our poem is supposed to be
about?’
‘All right, let it pass,’ said Dai-yu. ‘We’ll have another look at it tomorrow.’

She continued.

DAI-YU:
And all in silvery light illuminate.
Prizes and forfeits impartially they ponder -


‘Oh dear! are we back with that lot again?’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Why not something
about ourselves for a change?’

XIANG-YUN:
Sibling verse-contests they adjudicate.
Poets lean on railings, seeking inspiration –

'You’ve managed to get round to us at last!’ said Dai-yu.

DAI-YU:
Or hunt for rhymes, propped up against a gate.
The excitement lingers, though the party’s over –


‘Oh, does it?’ said Xiang-yun.

XIANG-YUN:
The sounds of music softly terminate.
Slowly the talk and laughter fade to silence -


‘It’s getting harder all the time now to rhyme,’ said Dai-yu.

DAI-YU:
Leaving a moonscape hushed and desolate.
On dewy steps the tiny toadstools sprout –
‘Just a minute, I can’t think how to rhyme this,’ said Xiang-yun.
She got up and paced to and fro, hands clasped behind her, thinking.
‘Ha, yes, that’ll do!’ she said after some moments. ‘Good job I thought of that word,
otherwise I might have had to give up.’

XIANG-YUN:
Tight-curled albizzia bushes pernoctate.
A rain-swelled swirl rips through the brook-bed rocks –

Dai-yu leapt to her feet, unable to restrain a cry of admira?tion.


‘You wretch! You certainly have left the good things till last. “Pernoctate” is a
splendid word. But what is “albizzia” for goodness’ sake?’
‘I came across it yesterday in the Prose Anthology,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘I was going to
look it up because I didn’t know what kind of tree it was, but Cousin Chai told me I
didn’t need to: she said it was another name for what we nowadays call “mimosa”. I
didn’t believe her, so I looked it up all the same. She was right. That girl knows
everything.’
‘Well, it was very clever of you to have thought of it,’ said Dai-yu, smiling,
‘especially as mimosa does in fact close up at night. But that “rain-swelled swirl” line
is brilliant. That single line is worth all the lines we have made up so far put together.
I shall have to think very carefully before capping it. I very much doubt whether, even
so, I shall be able to think of anything as good.’
After thinking for a while, she produced the following.

DAI-YU:
And wind-combed leaves on ledges congregate.
The Weaving Maid in lonely splendour shines -


‘Your capping line is not at all bad,’ said Xiang-yun, ‘but that second line wanders
off the track a bit. Still, I suppose you could say your “Weaving Maid” is saved from
being mere padding by the “lonely”. It introduces an element of feeling into the line.’

XIANG-YUN:
Damp airs the silver Toad of the moon inflate.
See where the Hare immortal medicine pounds -
Dai-yu nodded silently for some moments before reciting her own two lines.

DAI-YU:
Thither Chang E was forced to emigrate.
A man moves upwards through the constellations -

Xiang-yun, gazing up at the moon, also nodded.

XIANG-YUN:
A raft floats skywards with a human freight.
Waxing or waning, the moon’s face, ever changing –


‘That capping line is not good,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It merely repeats what my line said in
other words. You manage to get clear again with your second line. I suppose you
wanted to compensate for the sameness of the first couplet by making a big jump in
the second.’

DAI-YU:
Its substance changeless and inanimate.
Soon the clepsydra’s night-long drip will cease –

Xiang-yun was about to continue when Dai-yu drew her attention to a black shape in
the middle of the lake.
‘Look, in that dark shadow there, like a human shape! Do you think it could be a
ghost?’
Xiang-yun laughed.
‘Oh, she’s seeing ghosts now! I’m not afraid of ghosts. I shall throw a stone at it.’
She bent down to pick up a pebble and hurled it into the centre of the lake. They
heard a plop and saw the distorted image of the moon expand and contract as
concentric ripples travelled outwards from the shattered surface. There was a loud
squawk, and from the middle of the dark shadow a white stork flew up and flapped
his way across the water in the direction of Lotus Pavilion.
‘So that’s who it was!’ said Dai-yu. ‘I wasn’t expecting him to be there. He gave me
quite a shock.’
‘I’m very grateful to that stork,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘He’s given me a first line for the
next couplet.’

XIANG-YUN:
Black shades the lamp’s last gleams annihilate
A stork’s dark shape crosses the cold, bright water –

Dai-yu murmured admiringly, but stamped with vexation when she began to think
about finishing the couplet.
‘Wretched stork, coming to her aid like that! This is not like the “rain-swelled swirl”
couplet: I’m not going to be able to complete it by paralleling the whole line. A
contrast for the dark moving shape is the most I can hope for. But your line is so
natural, so simple and expressive. I feel almost like giving up.’
‘Perhaps if we both thought about it we could finish it together,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Or,
if you prefer, let’s break off now and you can try again tomorrow.’
Dai-yu stared up at the sky, ignoring her. Suddenly, after remaining immobile for
some seconds, she gave a little laugh.
‘Stop your chatter, girl! I can finish this couplet. Listen:

DAI- YU:
Where, moon-embalmed, a dead muse lies in state.

Xiang-yun clapped her hands.
‘Excellent! Couldn’t be better! I love your “dead muse”!’ She sighed. ‘I mean
excellent from a purely poetic point of view, because it’s so original. It’s a bit morbid,
though. I don’t think it can be good for a person in your state of health to indulge in
such chilling fantasies.’
‘With you to compete against, how else could I keep my end up?’ said Dai-yu.
‘Because I put so much into that last line -’
Just at that moment a figure stepped out from behind the spur of rock beyond the
railings.
‘Bravo! An excellent line!’ said this person. ‘But it is, indeed, a little too melancholy.
Don’t do any more. If you go on from there, the danger is that you may produce
something forced and mechanical, which instead of offsetting the beauty of your line
will merely spoil it.’
Startled by this unexpected interruption, the two girls looked hard in the direction
from which it came and with some surprise recognized the speaker as Adamantina.
‘What are you doing here?’ they asked her.
‘Hearing the sounds of your moon-watching party, followed later by the sound of a
flute playing, I was tempted to come out and enjoy the moon myself. I wanted to see
it over this open expanse of water, where it appears to most advantage, and as I
approached, I could hear you both reciting. Such pure refinement constrained me to
stay and listen. But there were lines which, in spite of their excellence, contained a
note of almost decadent melancholy, lines which made me fearful for the person
uttering them. That is why I came out of my concealment and prevented you from
going on. Lady Jia has long since broken up the party. Everyone else in the Garden
must be in bed by now. I wonder where your maids are. Doubtless they are
somewhere looking for you. Are you not afraid of catching cold? Come with me, and I
shall give you some hot tea to drink. It must be nearly dawn.’
Dai-yu laughed.
‘I’d no idea the night was so far advanced.’
The three of them walked together to Green Bower Hermitage. A faint light still
flickered in the Buddha shrine and the incense in the burner gave off a tiny smoke. All
the old lay-sisters were asleep. A little maid, nodding sleepily on Adamantina’s
meditation mat, appeared to be the only person still up. She roused herself when
Adamantina called to her and made some tea with water from the already boiling
kettle. Just at that moment there was a knocking at the gate and the little maid
hurried to open it. It turned out to be Nightingale and Kingfisher with two or three
old womenservants, looking for their mistresses. They found their mistresses drinking
tea inside.
‘Well!’ they said. ‘You’ve led us a fine old dance! We’ve been all over the Garden
looking for you. We even tried Mrs Xue’s outside. In the end we happened to go to
that little pavilion under the mountain, just as the caretakers were waking up. When
we asked them about you they said, “There were two people talking outside on the
covered verandah a while ago, then a third one came along and we heard them
saying they were going to the Hermitage.” That’s how we knew you were here.’
Adamantina told the little maid to take them round to the back where they could sit
down and have some tea. She herself took paper, inkstone, brush and ink and began
writing out the poem in linked couplets at the other two’s dictation.
Dai-yu was impressed by Adamantina’s enthusiasm.
‘I have never before liked to ask for your opinions about poetry because I have
never before seen you show so much interest,’ she said; ‘but since you now obviously
are in the mood for discussing it, won’t you please favour us with some criticism? If
you think that what we have done is no good at all, let us burn it; hut if you can see
ways of improving it, do please correct it for us.’
‘I certainly would not presume to alter any of it,’ said Adamantina smiling; ‘but as
there are no less than twenty-three couplets here, I am pretty sure that all your best
lines must have been used up by now, and that if you were to go on, there would be
a danger that you might begin to flag. What I should have liked to do would have
been to go on for you myself; but I am afraid that if I did, I might only succeed in
adding a dog’s tail to your leopard-skin!’
Dai-yu had never seen Adamantina compose poetry before and took her up eagerly
on her obvious willingness to do so now.
‘Oh please do, if you have a mind to! Though our verses may be of little value, they
will gain distinction by being associated with yours.’
‘In order to conclude what you have done so far,’ said Adamantina, ‘it will be
necessary to bring the poem back to what we Buddhists call the “proper aspect”. If
we continue to abandon reality and go chasing after the bizarre and the supernatural,
we shall be guilty not only of unmaidenliness but also of losing sight of our subject.’
Mesdemoiselles Lin and Shi agreed.
Adamantina picked up the brush and began, muttering and writing by turns, until,
having knocked off some dozen or so couplets, all in the same apparently effortless
manner, she laid the brush down again and handed the paper over for the other two
to read. This is what she had written:

In golden censers figured incense burns;
Unguents in their jade pots coagulate.

A flute provokes the grieving widow’s weeping;
She craves some warmth her bed’s chill to abate.

Its cheerless hangings stir in the wind of autumn,
Its love-ducks mock a mistress without mate.

Thick dews make treacherous the slippery moss,
And spears of frost the tall bamboos serrate.

Better the winding lakeside path to follow,
Or lonely hilltop to perambulate.

Bound demons seem to writhe in the tortured rock-shapes;
In the trees’ black shadows wild things pullulate.

Light’s harbingers begin with the dark to struggle,
And morning’s first dews to accumulate.

Birds in a thousand treetops wake the woodland;
In the echoing valley sad apes ululate.
My footsteps tread the path’s familiar turnings,
Nor need the stream’s source to investigate.

From Green Bower convent sounds the matin bell;
And Sweet-rice cocks the dawn anticipate.

Why should this rapt enjoyment end in sorrow,
Or timid cares our conscience irritate?

Poets ought in themselves to find their pleasure,
Not in the message they communicate.

As daylight breaks let none of us plead tiredness,
But over tea continue our debate.

At the end of these couplets she had written down the title for the whole poem:
Mid-Autumn Night in Prospect Garden: A Poem in Thirty-five Couplets
Dai-yu and Xiang-yun were full of admiration.
‘Strange that we should be always looking round for poetic talent,’ they said, ‘and
all the time we have had a poet like you on our very doorstep! These verses of yours
make anything we have ever done look very amateurish.’
‘I must have another look at them tomorrow and touch them up a bit,’ said
Adamantina smiling. ‘It’s already dawn. We really must go to bed.’
Dai-yu and Xiang-yun got up and took their leave. Their maids left with them.
Adamantina saw them outside the gate and stood a long while watching them go.
They had already covered a good part of the way back when she at last went in again
and closed the gate after her.
Kingfisher wanted Xiang-yun to go to Li Wan’s place to sleep.
‘The people at Mrs Zhu’s are expecting you, miss. You ought to go there.’
‘Drop in there on the way and tell them not to wait up for me any longer,’ said
Xiang-yun. ‘Mrs Zhu is still ill. If I went back there to sleep now, I’m afraid I might
disturb her. If I’m going to disturb anyone, let it be Miss Lin.’
When they reached the Naiad’s House, they found half the servants there asleep. The
girls took off their ornaments and outer clothes, washed, and got into bed.
Nightingale let down the bed-curtains, and having set the lamp down within easy
reach of the bed, went out and closed the door.
But neither of the girls could sleep, Xiang-yun because she always had difficulty in
getting to sleep in a strange bed, and Dai-yu because her anaemic condition always
made sleeping difficult for her, and because on this occasion she had long since
passed beyond tiredness, so that for her sleep was in any case out of the question.
For a long time the two of them lay tossing and turning on the bed.
‘Can’t you get to sleep?’ Dai-yu asked Xiang-yun eventually.
‘I can never get to sleep in a strange bed,’ said Xiang-yun with a rueful laugh.
‘Anyway, I’m too tired to get to sleep. I’ll just have to lie and rest. Can’t you get to
sleep either?’
Dai-yu sighed.
‘This is no novelty for me,’ she said. ‘I don’t suppose I get more than ten really good
nights’ sleep in a year.’
‘No wonder you’re always ill,’ said Xiang-yun.
Our story continues in the following chapter.




CHAPTER 77

A wronged maid takes a loving
last leave of her master
And three young actresses seek to
escape matrimony in the cloister



To Lady Wang it appeared that, with the passing of the Mid?-Autumn festival,
Xi-feng’s condition had improved considerably. True, she was still far from well, but
she could get about in the house now and even venture out of doors. The physician,
who, notwithstanding this improvement, had on Lady Wang’s instructions been
requested to continue his daily visits, was now recommending a course of pills
designed to regularize her periods and make some new blood to replace the
quantities she had lost. Observing that the prescription for these pills included two
ounces of the best quality ginseng, Lady Wang ordered her maids to get out her own
supply. After much rummaging they found a few pieces not much thicker than a large
hairpin in one of the little medicine-boxes. When they showed them to Lady Wang,
she thought them of too inferior a quality and ordered the maids to look again; but
further searching produced only a large packet of ‘whis?kers’ broken off from the
rootlets.
‘When one doesn’t need this stuff, there is always plenty of it,’ said Lady Wang
testily. ‘It is only when we want some that you can’t find any. I am always telling you:
you must keep a proper check on things and you must keep them together, but you
won’t do as I say: you will leave things lying around all over the place, and then
afterwards you never know where to look for them.’
‘I think this is all the ginseng we’ve got,’ said Suncloud. ‘That time Lady Xing came
for some, I think she must have taken it all.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Lady Wang. ‘Go and look again. And look properly this time!’
Suncloud had to go off and search some more. She came back bearing several
packets of herbs.
‘I don’t know what is in these, Your Ladyship. If there isn’t any ginseng in any of
these, then we really haven’t got any.’
Lady Wang opened the packets. She had no recollection of what they contained and
could not identify the contents, but she could tell at a glance that none of them
contained any ginseng. She sent someone to Xi-feng’s room to ask if Xi-feng had got
any herself. Xi-feng came over to reply.
‘I’ve only got extract of ginseng,’ she said. ‘Actually I have got a few dried leaves and
whiskers, but they are not of good quality and I use them every day in my infusions.’
Lady Wang was obliged to ask Lady Xing; but she, too, was unable to oblige.
Lady Wang was now reduced to going round in person to Grandmother Jia and
begging some from her. Grandmother Jia at once asked Faithful to get out whatever
remained of her own supply. Fortunately there was still a large packetful. The roots
were of various sizes, but mostly about the thickness of a finger. Faithful weighed out
two ounces and gave them to Lady Wang, who carried them back to her own
apartment and there handed them over to Zhou Rui’s wife, together with the packets
of unidentified herbs, instructing her to get one of the pages to carry them to the
doctor. While he was about it, she said, he could determine what the herbs were and
write their names on the packets.
When Zhou Rui’s wife reappeared some time later, she was carrying not only the
packets of herbs but also the ginseng.
‘He’s written the names on the packets,’ she said. ‘But this ginseng - he says it’s
very high quality ginseng, but it’s too old. He says ginseng isn’t like other medicines:
no matter how good it is, after a hundred years or so it turns into dust. This ginseng
here hasn’t turned into dust yet, but he says it’s already dried-up, like rotten wood.
It’s got no goodness in it. He told me to bring it back. He said tell Her Ladyship to try
and get hold of some a bit fresher than this. It doesn’t matter about the roots being a
bit on the thin side as long as it’s fresh.’
Lady Wang bowed her head and thought for some moments in silence.
‘I suppose there’s nothing else for it. We shall just have to buy two ounces. - Take
this stuff away!’ she said, feeling no inclination to examine the packets. One of the
maids removed them while she continued with her instructions to Zhou Rui’s wife.
‘Tell our buyer to pick out ginseng of the very best quality. He is to get it as cheaply as
he can, of course, but it must be high quality ginseng. Oh, and if Lady Jia should ask
any of you about this, tell her that we used the ginseng she gave us. Don’t go
prattling to her about what the doctor said.’
Zhou Rui’s wife was about to go off on her errand when Bao-chai, who happened to
be sitting in the room, smilingly intervened.
‘Just a minute, Aunt. There is really no good ginseng to be had in the shops
nowadays. If the dealers ever get hold of a whole root, they cut it into two or three
sections which they carve into shape and graft crowns and rootlets onto so that they
can make more money by passing off each section as a whole root. Our firm has
quite a lot to do with the ginseng suppliers. If I had a word with Mamma about this, I
am sure Pan could arrange for one of our people to get two ounces of whole, uncut
root from the suppliers. It might cost rather a lot, but at least you could be sure that
you were getting ginseng of the very highest quality.’
‘You are so knowledgeable!’ said Lady Wang gratefully. ‘Would you do that then? I
am sure it would be better for the request to come from you.’
Bao-chai left immediately and was gone for a long time.
‘He’s sent someone to see about it,’ she said when she got back. ‘We shall have a
reply by this evening. That means that we ought to be able to get the stuff first thing
tomorrow. That isn’t too long to wait, is it?’
Lady Wang was delighted, though her comment was a somewhat rueful one.
‘We have always kept a supply of ginseng in the past, and we have given I don’t
know how much away to other people; but now that we want some ourselves, we
have to run around looking for it elsewhere.’
She sighed.
‘Although ginseng is so costly, it is only a medicine,’ said Bao-chai consolingly. ‘As
such it ought to be given away to others, so that its benefit may be spread as widely
as possible. People in our position cannot behave like ill-bred parvenus who hoard
their ginseng like an heirloom and can only under the most exceptional
circumstances be induced to part with any.’
Lady Wang nodded.
‘Yes, I suppose you are right.’
A little later, after Bao-chai had gone and there was no one else with her in the room,
Lady Wang called Zhou Rui’s wife over to ask about another matter.
‘When you made that search in the Garden the other day, did you find what you
were looking for?’
Zhou Rui’s wife had already consulted Xi-feng about what Lady Wang should be told
and Xi-feng had insisted that there should be no concealment; she therefore told her
everything. Lady Wang was deeply shocked. When she had somewhat recovered
from her surprise and begun thinking what to do, it occurred to her that, as Chess
was Ying-chun’s maid and therefore really a member of Lady Xing’s establishment, it
would first be necessary to acquaint Lady Xing with the facts before proceeding any
further. Zhou Rui’s wife had her own ideas on the subject.
‘Lady Xing was so angry with Wang Shan-bao’s wife for meddling that she boxed
her ears and Wang Shan-bao’s wife has kept at home ever since, pretending to be ill.
She certainly won’t have spoken to Lady Xing about this matter because Chess is her
own daughter’s child and it would be like slapping her own face if she did so. I expect
she’s pretending to have forgotten all about it and is just waiting for the whole affair
to blow over. If I report it, Lady Xing will like as not take umbrage and say that I am
interfering. It would be best simply to take Chess and the things we found along to
her and let her work it all out for herself. Probably she’ll give Chess a beating and
have her married to one of the boys and pick another maid for Miss Ying and that will
be the end of the matter. But if I just go along and tell her, without taking Chess or
the things, she’ll probably think up some excuse for doing nothing. “If your mistress
has found this out,” she’ll say, “why doesn’t she deal with it herself? Why do you
come here asking me about it?” That way it will get put off. Then suppose when no
one is looking the girl finds some means of doing away with herself? We shall have a
fine to-do on our hands! She’s already been under guard now for two or three days.
If we don’t do something about her soon, we shall be simply asking for trouble.’
Lady Wang reflected for some moments.
‘Yes, you are right,’ she said at last. ‘Do as you have suggested straight away then,
and after that we will deal with our own young harpies.’
Now that she had her commission, Zhou Rui’s wife got together several of the other
women and took them with her to Ying-chun’s apartment. Ying-chun listened with
tears in her eyes while Zhou Rui’s wife explained what she had come about, and it
was evident that the idea of parting with Chess distressed her; on the other hand, as
she had now heard something about the raid from the other maids and knew that
this matter was connected in some way with morality, she felt that however painful
the parting might be, there was probably nothing she could do to prevent it. Chess
was unaware of this. She had pleaded with Ying-chun the morning after the discovery
and was convinced that Ying-chun could save her if she had a mind to. It could only
be her habitual reluctance to speak out, her usual weak irresolution, that now kept
her silent. When it became clear that her mistress was determined to say nothing
and that there was to be no escape for her, Chess fell down on her knees and
reproached her tearfully.
‘You have a cruel heart, miss! All through these last few days you have allowed me
to go on hoping, but now, when the time comes, you won’t say a single word to help
me!’
‘You surely don’t expect Miss Ying to keep you?’ said Zhou Rui’s wife indignantly.
‘Even if she did, what would all the other people in the Garden say? And how would
you be able to look them in the face after what you have done? Take my advice: the
best thing you can do is to pack your things up and get out of here as quickly as
possible, before anyone else has had a chance of finding out what you have been up
to.’
‘I know that you have done something serious,’ said Ying-?chun tearfully. ‘If I speak
up for you or try to keep you, it will be all up with me too. Apart from that, look how
quickly they got rid of Picture, in spite of all the years she had served Miss Xi: just
“Out!” and out she went. I don’t think it will stop at you and Picture. I think they
must be planning to get rid of all the older girls in the Garden. We are all going to be
separated sooner or later. If you ask me, I think you and I might just as well part now
as any other time.’
‘There, you see?’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘Miss Ying understands. There’ll be plenty of
others dismissed after you have gone, don’t you worry!’
Since there was to be no respite, Chess, struggling to hold back her tears, made a last
kotow to her mistress and said good-bye to the other maids. As she was leaving, she
leaned forwards and whispered in Ying-chun’s ear:
‘Try and find out what’s happening to me, miss. Put in a good word for me if you
hear I’m suffering.’
‘Of course I will,’ said Ying-chun. There were tears in her own eyes as she said it.
Those were the last words spoken before Zhou Rui’s wife and the other women took
Chess away. Two old women accompanied them carrying her things. They had gone
no more than a few steps out of the courtyard gate when little Tangerine came
running after them and handed Chess a silk purse, while with the other hand she
wiped her streaming eyes.
‘This is from the mistress. She says it’s hard to lose you after all the years you and
she have been together and she wants you to have this to remember her by.’
As she received the purse, Chess was unable to restrain a further outburst of tears,
and for some moments she and Tangerine clung together weeping, until Zhou Rui’s
wife, growing impatient, began hustling Chess on her way, forcing the two girls apart.
Chess spoke to the women imploringly:
‘For charity’s sake, couldn’t you turn a blind eye just for a few minutes while I say
good-bye to the maids in the other apartments? Some of the older ones I have
known so long, they have become almost like sisters to me.’
Zhou Rui’s wife and the other women all had work of their own to do which they had
left unwillingly and were anxious to get back to; moreover all of them deeply
resented the overbearing manner which Chess and the other senior maids had
adopted towards them in the past; there was therefore little chance of their being
moved by her plea.
‘If I were you I should stop all this shilly-shallying and be on your way,’ said Zhou
Rui’s wife coldly. ‘We’ve got more important things to do than sit around waiting
while you say your good-byes. In any case, they’re not your real sisters, so what’s the
point of seeing them? It’s only playing for time. You’ve got to leave in the end,
however long you delay. You might just as well get it over with now, as quickly as
possible.’
She hurried on towards the rear corner gate of the Garden. The hapless Chess, not
daring to say another word, had to follow her out of it.
By coincidence, just as they were coming out of the Garden, they ran into Bao-yu
who was returning to it from outside. Seeing Chess in the company of this grim
escort and with the two older women behind her carrying a lot of things, he realized
that she must be leaving the Garden for good. He had heard something now about
the raid and had noticed that Skybright’s sickness had grown more serious since her
interview with his mother (though he could not induce her to say why). The
realization that he was witnessing Chess’s dismissal came as all the greater shock in
the light of these other happenings. He stepped forwards impetuously and barred
their way.
‘Where are you going?’
Zhou Rui’s wife knew Bao-yu from of old and greatly feared that they were now to be
held up indefinitely with a lot of pointless chatter.
‘It’s nothing to do with you,’ she said, smiling grimly. ‘You get back to your books!’
‘Just stop a moment, there’s a good woman,’ said Bao-yu appealingly, just long
enough to hear what I’ve got to say.’
‘Her Ladyship told us we were under no circumstances to delay,’ said Zhou Rui’s
wife. ‘There’s nothing to be said. We’ve got our orders from Her Ladyship, that’s all
we’re concerned about.’
Chess clung to Bao-yu and wept.
‘There’s nothing they can do. If you want to save me, you’ll have to speak to Her
Ladyship.’
Bao-yu was deeply upset. His eyes filled with tears.
‘I don’t know what terrible thing you are supposed to have done,’ he said, ‘but I
know that something has upset Skybright and made her ill, and now you are going.
What on earth is happening?’
Zhou Rui’s wife turned on Chess angrily.
‘You’re not a lady’s maid now, you know. Now if you don’t do what I tell you, I have
the right to beat you, just like any other servant. You can’t play fast and loose with us
now and then run to your mistress to save you from the consequences. I’ve told you
a number of times to be on your way, but you take no notice. A maid holding on to a
young master - whoever heard of such a thing!’
At this the other women laid violent hands on Chess and hurried her away. Bao-yu,
fearing that if he said anything it would only make matters worse, glared at them in
silence; but he could not resist pointing his linger at them when they had gone and -
sotto voce - giving bitter vent to his feelings:
‘Strange, the way they get like this when they marry! It must be something in the
male that infects them. If anything they end up even worse than the men!’
The old women on duty at the gate overheard this and could not help laughing at
him.
‘In that case all girls must be good and all women must be bad,’ they said. ‘You
don’t really believe that, do you?’
‘Indeed I do,’ said Bao-yu feelingly. ‘That’s precisely what I do believe.’
Just at that moment some other old women came hurrying up to them.
‘Make sure you’re all here in case Her Ladyship wants you,’ said one of them. ‘She’s
in the Garden now, making an inspection. And someone go and get Skybright’s
cousin and his wife, so that they’ll be ready to take her away presently.’ She chuckled.
‘Holy Name! The Lord has opened his eyes at last! With that little pest out of the way,
it will be a better place for all of us!’
At the old woman’s mention of his mother’s presence, Bao?-yu, fearing that it might
bode ill for Skybright, had rushed off immediately, so that he had missed the gloating
remark which followed it. When he arrived at Green Delights, he found a small crowd
of women waiting outside the door. His mother was sitting inside the room with
anger written all over her face. She deliberately ignored him as he entered. Skybright,
who had taken no nourishment of any kind for the past four or five days and was in
too weak a state to get up, had been dragged from the kang and now stood facing
her, propped up between two women. Her hair was in disarray and her face looked
as if it needed washing.
‘Throw out the clothes she has been wearing,’ Lady Wang was saying. ‘She can take
them with her. The rest can be kept here and given to more deserving maids to wear.’
Having finished with Skybright, she ordered all the other maids to be called in, from
Aroma down to the most junior maid-of-all-work, to be subjected to her scrutiny.
Each and every one of them was in Lady Wang’s opinion a potential corrupter of her
boy.
‘Which is the one whose birthday is on the same day as Bao-yu’s?’ she asked.
Since the girl herself would not answer, one of the old women pointed her out.
‘This is the one, Your Ladyship: Citronella. She’s called “Number Four”. She’s the
one whose birthday is on the same day as Bao-yu’s.’
Lady Wang examined the girl closely. Although not half as good-looking as Skybright,
she had a certain gracefulness about her, and intelligence shone out in her every
feature. She was moreover better dressed than the other maids. Lady Wang sniffed
scornfully.
‘Another shameless young baggage! This is the one who said that those with the
same birthday are destined to be husband and wife. You did say that, didn’t you? You
think that because I live away from here I don’t know these things; but though I may
not come here often myself, I have my eyes and ears here, watching you and listening
to you all the time. Do you imagine that I would willingly allow my only son to be
corrupted by creatures like you?’
Number Four reddened, hearing from Lady Wang’s own lips the words she once said
to Bao-yu in private. It was useless to deny that she had said them. She hung her
head and wept.
‘Tell her people to come and take her away,’ said Lady Wang. ‘She can be paired off
with one of the boys.’
Exit Number Four.
Now which is the one with the foreign name?’ said Lady Wang.
Parfumée-Aventurin stepped forward.
Oh, it is you. One expects an actress to be a vampire, but one had hoped, after you
turned down the opportunity to go free and insisted on staying here, that you would
make some effort to behave. Instead, it seems, you have turned your attentions on
my son and been encouraging him to get up to I don’t know what sorts of mischief.’
Parfumée smiled.
‘I haven’t encouraged him to get up to anything.’
Lady Wang smiled back at her.
‘You would argue with me, would you? I suppose it is hardly surprising, considering
the way you treated your own foster-mother while I was away. - Call her
foster-mother!’ she ordered. ‘I make her a present of this girl. She can marry her to
whomever she likes. And you can give her her things to take as well.’
Having thus disposed of Parfumée, she went on to give orders that none of the
remaining ex-actresses were to stay any longer in the Garden. Their foster-mothers
were to be summoned to collect them and allowed to dispose of them as they
wished. The delight and gratitude of these women when they received the message
can be imagined. They arranged among themselves to visit Lady Wang in a body and
kowtow their thanks to her before going into the Garden to collect the girls.
Lady Wang now proceeded to inspect Bao-yu’s things. Anything which looked at all
unfamiliar she had put on one side. The whole lot were then wrapped up in one big
bundle and carried to her own apartment.
‘Much better make a clean sweep of these things,’ she said. ‘There will be that
much less for people to gossip about.’
In conclusion she admonished Aroma and the remaining maids.
‘Now be careful! From now on if I hear of anything the slightest bit untoward
happening, I shall have no mercy! I can’t move you out yet, because there are still
investigations in progress, but next year I shall have the whole lot of you moved back
into the mansion, and then perhaps I shall be able to set my mind at rest.’
She went off at the head of her little troop of women, not even staying for a cup of
tea.
When Bao-yu heard from the old woman of his mother’s visit, he had expected
something unpleasant but of no great consequence: perhaps another inspection of
the maids’ possessions. He was therefore quite unprepared for the raging tempest
that had just passed over him. The things his mother had charged the maids with
showed so uncanny a knowledge of even his most intimate conversations with them
that there seemed little point in denial. He felt wretched enough to die, but it was
clear that even self-immolation could achieve nothing while his mother’s anger was
at its height. He therefore followed after her in silence, until he had seen her as far as
Drenched Blossoms Pavilion half-way across the bridge, when she peremptorily
ordered him to return.
‘Go back - and get on with your studies! Then next time your father asks you about
them, you will at least be able to say that you have made a start.’
Bao-yu turned back. All the way back to Green Delights he was thinking to himself:
‘Who’s been blabbing? No one outside knows about these things. How did Mother
get to hear about them?’
The question was continuing to trouble him when he entered his room. He noticed
that Aroma was in tears.
‘Well, she would be if any of the senior maids was leaving,’ he thought. ‘It’s only
natural.’
He flung himself down on the bed and broke into loud sobs. Aroma tried to talk him
out of his despair. She knew that, whatever might become of anyone else, it was
Skybright that he was chiefly concerned about.
‘Oh, do get up!’ she said. ‘What’s the use of crying? I tell you, Skybright will be
better off where she is going. Back at home she will at least be able to have a few
days to herself in peace and quiet. And if you really can’t bear to be without her, you
have only to wait until Her Ladyship’s anger has cooled down a bit and then go and
ask Her Old Ladyship to have her brought back again. It shouldn’t be difficult. Her
Ladyship was acting in anger. Probably she had heard someone gossiping about her.’
‘But what heinous crime is Skybright supposed to have committed?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Maybe she isn’t,’ said Aroma. ‘Maybe Her Ladyship just thinks she is too
good-looking. She probably thinks that anyone who is so good-looking must be
unreliable. She knows these very beautiful young women are often trouble-makers.
Probably she dislikes Skybright just for being beautiful. It’s better to be a plain, gawky
person like me!’
‘Who said that beautiful women are trouble-makers?’ said Bao-yu. ‘There have
always been lots and lots of beautiful women who were nothing of the kind. But
never mind all that. What I can’t understand is, how did Mother get to hear about all
those private jokes of ours? No one outside could have told her. It’s very, very
strange.’
‘Look how careless you are,’ said Aroma. ‘Once you get a bit excited you are
capable of saying anything, regardless of who else is around. Many and many’s the
time I have given you a look or made some sign to warn you, but you never notice.’
‘Maybe,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but tell me this. How is it that she’d heard something
damaging about every single person in this apartment except you and Musk and
Ripple?’
Somewhat taken aback by this question, Aroma hung her head and pondered it for
some moments, but she was unable to think of an explanation. She laughed
embarrassedly.
‘I agree, it is rather strange. We three must often have made careless remarks that
could have been used against us. I wonder why Her Ladyship didn’t mention any?
Perhaps she’ll come back and deal with us three later.’
‘You?’ said Bao-yu, laughing incredulously. ‘The famous paragon of all the virtues?
There’s little danger of her finding fault with you. Or with those other two, whom you
trained and moulded in your own image. Parfumée I can understand: she is young
and precocious and inclined to use her intelligence for putting other people down, so
it’s hardly surprising that she should be disliked. Number Four’s unpopularity I blame
myself for. It dates from that time when you and I had quarrelled about something
and I allowed her to wait on me in your place. The others must have resented my
giving her special treatment, and that, ultimately, must be the reason for what has
happened to her today. But why Skybright? You and she started together with my
grandmother when you were little girls. It’s true she is a bit better-looking than the
rest of you, but she has never taken advantage of that fact: no one has ever been
made to feel threatened by it. Even her forthrightness - and she could be quite
sharp-tongued on occasion - has never, as far as I am aware, given serious offence. I
suppose it must be as you say: her good looks have been her undoing.’
He concluded by once more bursting into tears.
Mulling over what he had just said, Aroma concluded that it could only mean that he
suspected her. There seemed little point in protesting. She sighed.
‘There’s One above who knows the truth of the matter; but I don’t suppose we
shall find out who it was for a while yet. At all events, crying isn’t going to help. Much
better keep your spirits up and next time Her Old Ladyship is feeling cheerful, explain
what has happened and ask to have Skybright back again.’
‘You only say that to humour me,’ said Bao-yu bitterly. ‘According to you I am to
wait until Mother’s anger has subsided and after that wait until a favourable
opportunity arises for talking to Grandmother; but what makes you think that
Skybright’s illness will wait that long? Ever since she came into our family as a child
she has lived comfortably. She has never had to experience a single day of real
hardship. Sending her to that place now is like taking a potted orchid that has just
started putting out its first tender spears of growth and setting it down in a pigsty.
Apart from being physically ill, she must be in a terrible state mentally as well. And
she has no kind parents to look after her, don’t forget: only that worthless cousin and
his wife. I doubt she’ll last there a fortnight. I may not even be able to see her again.’
‘Curfew for the common people, but the Prefect can light a fire,’ said Aroma drily.
‘What a fuss you’d have made if I’d said anything so unlucky! How can you bear to
talk so glibly about her dying?’
‘It isn’t unlucky to talk about what has already been foretold,’ said Bao-yu. ‘There
was a portent of her coming death last spring.’
‘Oh?’ said Aroma in some surprise. ‘What was that?’
‘The crab-apple tree in the courtyard here: only one half of it budded this year; the
other side seems to have died. I knew at the time that something awful must be
going to happen; now I can see that it must have been a portent of her death.’
Aroma laughed out loud.
‘Forgive me, but I just can’t help myself. You really are an old woman! And you
supposed to be so educated! How can what happens to trees and plants have
anything to do with human beings?’
Bao-yu sighed.
‘What do you know about it? Not only plants and trees, but all things that live and
grow have feelings. And like us, they are most responsive to those who most
appreciate them. There are plenty of examples from history: the juniper tree in front
of the temple of Confucius, the milfoil that grows beside his tomb, the cypress in
front of Zhu-ge Liang’s shrine, the pine-tree that grows in front of Yue Fei’s grave: all
those paragons of the vegetable world, mightily endowed with vital essence and able
to withstand the ravages of the centuries, have withered and dried up in times of
disorder, only to flourish once more when times were prosperous. In the course of a
thousand or more years all of them have died and come to life again several times
over. If those are not portents, what are they? On a somewhat less exalted level
there are the peonies beside Yang Gui-fei’s Aloeswood Pavilion, the rhododendrons
of the Duan-cheng-lou and the evergreen grass on Lady Bright’s grave. Surely you
can’t deny that all these are instances of sympathy between plants and humans? I
see no reason to doubt that our crab-apple tree too was reacting to a human
situation.’
By the time his idiotic discourse had ended, Aroma did not know whether to laugh or
groan.
‘You really make me angry,’ she said, ‘comparing Skybright with all those famous
people! What sort of creature do you think she is anyway? And even if she is so
wonderful, you seem to forget that I have precedence over her among your maids. If
the crab-apple is connected with any of us, it ought to be me. It must mean that I am
going to die.’
Bao-yu clapped his hand over her mouth.
‘Now, now, that’s enough of that! I’m already worried enough about her as it is, I
don’t want to have to worry about you as well. Let’s say no more about it. Three
people is quite enough to lose in one day!’
Aroma was secretly glad to hear him say this.
‘If I hadn’t said that to stop him,’ she thought, ‘heaven knows where this nonsense
would have ended!’
‘There’s something else I want to discuss with you,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’m not quite sure
whether you’ll agree to this or not. Couldn’t we somehow, without letting any of the
family know about it, contrive to let her have her things? Perhaps we could also send
her a few strings of whatever money we have managed to save, so that she has got
something to buy medicines with. Could you, for the sake of all your years together,
do this for her?’
Aroma laughed.
‘Do you really think I need asking? What a mean, inhuman sort of person you must
think I am! I’ve got her clothes and all her other things piled up over there, ready to
send her. I can’t send them now, in broad daylight. With so many prying eyes about it
would be simply asking for trouble. But as soon as it’s evening I shall get Mrs Liu to
take them to her. I’ve got several strings of cash that she can take to her as well.’
Bao-yu nodded.
‘I am a paragon of all the virtues, don’t forget,’ said Aroma teasingly. ‘It’s worth
spending a bit of money to keep up my reputation!’
Bao-yu smiled and said a few words to comfort her. He was afraid that she might
have taken what he said earlier to heart.
That evening, when things had quietened down a bit, he slipped out on his own to
the rear corner gate of the Garden and begged one of the old women there to take
him to Skybright’s house. At first she refused absolutely to help. She was too scared,
she said. What would become of her rice-bowl if Lady Wang got to hear of it? In the
end, after he had pleaded with her very insistently and also promised her some
money, she agreed to take him.
*
Skybright was in the first instance purchased, when she was barely ten years old, by
the Chief Steward Lai Da as a little slave-girl for his wife, who often took Skybright
with her when she went to work in Rong-guo House. It was in this way that she first
came to the attention of Grandmother Jia. Grandmother Jia took a great fancy to the
beautiful, intelligent little girl, and when Lai Da’s wife noticed this, she gave Skybright
to the old lady as a present. It was because the old lady thought so highly of
Skybright that she later on gave her as a maidservant to her beloved grandson.
Skybright had no recollection of her parents or of the place where she was born. The
only relation she knew of was a cousin somewhat older than herself, said to be her
father’s sister’s son, who was in bondservice elsewhere. After her instalment at the
mansion she begged Lai Da’s wife to have this cousin purchased too and find him
some employment with the Jias. The stewardess was touched by the gratitude and
respect that Skybright continued to show her after her advancement. At her
insistence Lai Da purchased the cousin, gave him a small job as a buyer, and even
provided him with a wife.
Unfortunately Skybright’s cousin was a timorous, poor-spirited creature, whereas the
wife Lai Da had chosen for him was a lively and rather attractive young woman.
Finding her husband unable to provide her with what she wanted, she soon took to
going out every day, dressed up to the nines, to exercise her charms on the other
servants. She was aided in this by a highly expressive pair of eyes which seldom failed
to convey their message. The men were drawn towards her irresistibly, like flies
towards carrion, so that there was seldom any lack of volunteers to fill the gap left by
her neglectful husband.
The couple lived in an apartment not far from the rear side gate of the Garden, and it
was to this place that Skybright was taken after her dismissal. The cousin’s young
wife had little stomach for nursing a sick relation, and as soon as she had eaten, was
off on her customary rounds, leaving Skybright alone and untended in the outer
room.
When Bao-yu arrived at the house, he told the old woman who had brought him to
wait at the gate and keep a look-out while he went inside. Raising the cotton
door-curtain he looked into the room. He could see Skybright at once, lying on an old
rush mat on the kang (fortunately she still had her own bedding) but no one else
appeared to be at home, and he wondered for a moment what he should do; then,
going over to the kang, he plucked timidly at the quilt in which she was wrapped and
gently called her name. His eyes were full of tears.
Skybright, who had been ill to start with, had been made even more so by the
detestable things said to her by her cousin and his wife since her arrival. After
coughing through most of the day, she had recently dozed off into a fitful sleep, and
it was not until Bao-yu had called her name for the second time that she opened her
eyes. What surprise, delight, sorrow, anguish all mixed in one when she saw who it
was! She gripped his hand tightly in hers, but for a long time she could only sob. At
last she managed to speak.
‘I didn’t think I should ever see you again.’
After that she coughed and coughed. Bao-yu was sobbing now himself.
‘Holy Name, it’s a good job you’ve come!’ she said. ‘Could you get me half a cup of
tea? I’m so thirsty, but though I’ve called and called, no one ever comes.’
Bao-yu hurriedly wiped his eyes.
‘Where’s the tea?’
‘It’s over there on the stove,’ said Skybright.
Bao-yu looked at the brick-and-mud-built stove against the wall. There was only a
sort of blackened earthenware skillet on it that bore no resemblance to a tea-pot. He
found a teacup on the table whose greasy, rancid odour reached his nostrils even
before he picked it up. Having located some water, he washed it twice, rinsed it twice,
dried it with his handkerchief, sniffed it (it still smelt) and half filled it with a dusky,
reddish liquid from the skillet. Was it tea? He tasted it dubiously. It had a bitter, acrid
taste with only a slight suggestion of tea about it.
‘That’s tea,’ said Skybright, who had raised herself on the pillow. ‘Please let me
have it. You can’t expect it to be as good as ours.’
Bao-yu handed it to her and she gulped it down greedily as if it were the most
delicious nectar. He watched her with tears running down his cheeks, suddenly
ashamed of his own fastidiousness.
‘If there’s anything you want to tell me,’ he said, ‘you’d better tell me now, while
there’s nobody else about.’
‘What have I got to tell?’ said Skybright. ‘I’m living now from day to day and from
hour to hour. I know I’m done for: it can’t be more than four or five days now at the
most. If it weren’t for one thing, I could die content. I know I’m a bit better-looking
than the others, but I’ve never tried to make up to you. Why will they insist that I am
some sort of vam?pire? It’s so unfair. And now I have so little time left. I ought not to
say this, but if I’d known in advance that it would be like this, I might have behaved
rather differently.’
She began to cry again.
Bao-yu took her hands in his own. They felt like bundles of dried twigs, so wasted had
she become. She was still wearing a pair of silver bangles on either wrist.
‘Better take these off,’ he said (he was crying himself as he spoke). ‘You can put
them on again when you are better.’
He took them off for her and put them under the pillow.
‘It’s a pity about these nails,’ he said. ‘It took you such a long time to grow them. By
the time you are better, I expect you’ll find that quite a lot of them will have broken
off.’
She wiped her eyes, curled the third and fourth fingers of her left hand back against
the side of her mouth and with a supreme effort half bit half tore off the two
two-inch lengths of scallion-like nail that projected from them.
‘Here!’ She put the pieces into his hand. ‘To remind you of me.’
Then she reached down inside the bedding and managed, after a great deal of
struggling, to take off the old red chemise she was wearing and hold it out to him.
Because of her weakness, the effort of doing this made her pant so much that she
could not speak; but Bao-yu understood what she wanted. He removed his outer
garment, took off the shirt he was wearing underneath it and laid it over her, and put
on the chemise she was holding out to him. He did not bother to do the buttons up,
since it would be hidden anyway beneath his outer garment. While he was fastening
his belt on again, he noticed that she was staring at him, trying to say some?thing.
‘Help me up!’
Even with Bao-yu’s assistance it cost her a good deal of effort to sit fully upright.
Once she was sitting up, she stretched one of her arms out and tried drawing the
shirt on herself. Bao-yu draped it over her shoulders and eased each of her arms in
turn into the sleeves, then gently laid her down again.
‘If anyone sees that when you get back and asks you whose it is,’ said Skybright,
weeping, ‘there’s no need to tell them any lies. Tell them it’s mine. Since I’ve got such
a bad reputation anyway, I might as well have something to show for it when I’m
gone!’
At that moment the door-curtain was lifted and the cousin’s wife came into the room,
all dazzling smiles.
‘Very nice! I’ve heard all that you two have been saying.’ She directed a bold look at
Bao-yu. ‘And what are you doing, a young master like you, coming to see us servants
in our quarters? Bet you heard I was young and good-looking and came here to flirt
with me!’
‘Please, I beg of you, don’t speak so loud!’ said Bao-yu entreatingly. ‘I shouldn’t
really be here, but your cousin was with me for many years: I came here to see her
because she is ill.’
The young woman smiled and nodded approvingly.
‘That’s right. They say you have a good heart.’
She took him by the hand and pulled him after her into the inner room.
‘If you don’t want me to make a noise, you can easily stop me. You have only to do
one little thing.’
She got her backside up onto the kang and drawing him down on top of her, put up
her legs and gripped him tightly between them. This was something totally outside
Bao-yu’s experience. His heart started pounding wildly, his face turned scarlet, and
his whole body began to tremble. It would have been hard to say what feeling was at
that moment uppermost in his mind: embarrassment, shame, fear or annoyance. All
he could manage to say was:
‘Don’t fool about, please!’
The young woman leered up at him through half-closed eyes.
‘Get away with you! From what I’ve been told, you’ve had plenty of practice with
other girls. What makes you so bashful today all of a sudden?’
Bao-yu became even redder.
‘Please let me go. If you’ve got anything to talk about, let’s discuss it like
reasonable human beings. There’s an old woman outside there listening. What do
you think you are doing?’
‘There’s no old woman out there,’ she said. ‘I saw her when I got back and told her
to wait for you at the Garden gate. Come on! I’ve waited a long time to get my hands
on you. If you won’t do what I ask, I’ll call out. You’re a bold one, aren’t you, coming
here! What will Her Ladyship say if she finds out? I was listening to you two outside
the window for quite a while. From what I could make out, you and she have nothing
between you. Well, more fool she, if that’s the case! You needn’t expect me to be so
daft!’
She began to get to work on his clothing, while Bao-yu made frantic efforts to pull
himself away. They were still struggling when a voice was heard outside the window
asking for Skybright. The young woman gave a start and let go of Bao-yu. Bao-yu was
so shaken and confused that he had not heard the voice, and Skybright, listening to
what was going on in the next room, was so overcome with shame and anger that
she had fainted clean away. This left only the cousin’s wife to answer the caller - or
rather callers, for when she went outside to look, it turned out to be Cook Liu and
Fivey with a bundle containing Skybright’s things. Cook Liu was also holding several
strings of cash.
‘We’ve brought these from Miss Aroma for your young lady,’ she said. ‘Which room
is she in?’
The young woman laughed.
‘This room here. Where else would we keep her?’
As Cook Liu and Fivey went into the outer room, a lurking figure dodged into the
inner room at the back. Cook Liu knew something of the young wife’s reputation and
assumed that it must be one of her lovers. Since Skybright appeared to be asleep, she
put the things down beside her and hurried out again. But Fivey had sharper eyes
than her mother and had recognized the lurking figure as Bao-yu.
‘Didn’t Miss Aroma say when we were leaving that she’d been looking for Master
Bao?’ she asked her mother.
‘Goodness, I nearly forgot!’ said Cook Liu. ‘Mrs Song told me just now that she
thought she’d seen him go out of the side gate. And there was someone waiting for
him outside the gate too, wasn’t there? They’ll be wanting to close presently.’
She turned back and asked the young woman if she had seen him.
‘No,’ said the cousin’s wife, beginning to feel nervous. ‘What would Master Bao be
doing at our house?’
Hearing her say this, Cook Liu began to go again; but Bao-yu, partly because he was
afraid of being shut out of the Garden and partly because he feared that the cousin’s
wife might return to the attack if he remained after the visitors had gone, threw
discretion to the winds and, lifting up the door-curtain, came rushing out after them.
‘Mrs Liu! Wait for me! We’ll go back together!’
Cook Liu was mightily astonished.
‘My dear young master! Whatever has brought you to this place?’
Bao-yu sped on ahead without replying.
‘Call him back, Ma!’ said Fivey. ‘Tell him not to be in so much of a hurry. He’ll run
into someone if he’s not careful and they’ll find out what he’s been up to. There’s no
need for him to hurry in any case. That person we saw waiting for him will see to it
that the gate’s kept open for him.’
She and her mother ran after Bao-yu to try and catch up with him. The cousin’s wife
stared after them disconsolately: her beautiful young gentleman had got away.
Bao-yu did not stop running until he was inside the Garden gate. Only then did he
feel safe again, though his heart was still beating wildly. Fortunately no one appeared
to have noticed his absence, and when he got back to Green Delights he managed to
put Aroma off by saying that he had been visiting Aunt Xue.
Shortly after this, as she was making up his bed, Aroma asked him how they should
sleep.
‘Oh, anyhow,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I don’t mind.’
It should be explained that during the year or two that had elapsed since her
unofficial promotion by Lady Wang, Aroma had been taking herself very seriously
and no longer, either at night or when they were alone together in the daytime,
permitted herself those affectionate intimacies that had been customary between
her and Bao-yu in the past. A slight distance seemed to have grown up between
them since their younger, more carefree days. Partly it was being so much busier that
kept her from him: for although the most impor?tant matters remained outside her
control, it was she who organized the sewing and other maid’s-work, took care of
Bao-yu’s and the junior maids’ pocket-money for them, attended to their clothing
and other equipment, and assumed responsibility for the general maintenance of the
apartment. Partly it was because she had a fear of infecting him: for she still
continued, though very infrequently, to cough blood.
     It was mainly for this last reason that she had for some time now ceased
sleeping in the same room. But Bao-yu was nervous at night and liked to have
someone near at hand whom he could call to when he woke up. Because she knew
that Skybright was a light sleeper, Aroma entrusted all the night-time duties, like
answering him when he called, getting up and making tea for him and so forth, to her,
so that it had long since been the custom for Skybright to sleep in the same room
with him beside his bed. Now that Skybright was no longer with him, Aroma made
her own bed up beside Bao-yu’s in Skybright’s place.
   Observing the somewhat dazed manner in which Bao-yu was conducting himself
that evening, Aroma urged him to go to bed early, and as soon as she had got him
settled, went to bed herself. But he seemed very restless. As she lay in her own bed
she could hear him sighing and muttering to himself in his. This went on until well
after midnight. Only then did he fall silent and appeared to have gone to sleep.
Relieved, Aroma began drifting off herself. But only for a moment. Before she had a
chance to get fully off to sleep, she heard him call out:
‘Skybright!’
‘What is it?’ said Aroma, instantly alert again.
Bao-yu said that he wanted some tea, so she got up and poured him out a cup. He
sighed as she handed it to him.
     ‘I’m so used to calling her, I forgot that it was you.’ Aroma laughed.
     ‘The first night she slept with you, you were calling out in your sleep for me. It
took you a while then to get used to the change.’
     They both lay down again. Again Bao-yu was restless and continued so for the
space of about two hours. It must have been four o’clock before he finally got to
sleep. Just as he was dropping off, Skybright walked into the room looking exactly as
she used to do before she was ill. She came right up to the bed and spoke to him.
‘Enjoy your lives, all of you! Mine is already over.’
      Immediately she had said that, she turned round and walked out again. Bao-yu
called out after her. His calling awoke Aroma, who assumed that he was once more
calling Skybright’s name instead of her own from force of habit. But when she went
over to ask him what he wanted, she saw that he was crying.
      ‘Skybright’s dead,’ he said.
      Aroma laughed.
      ‘Don’t be ridiculous! Whatever would anyone think if they heard you say such a
thing?’
      Nevertheless Bao-yu insisted that Skybright was dead and waited impatiently for
the daylight when he could send someone to find out the circumstances of her death.
But daylight brought a little maid knocking at the front corner gate of the Garden
with a message from Lady Wang.
      ‘You must tell Bao-yu to get up immediately and come over to Her Ladyship’s as
soon as he is washed and dressed. The Master is invited out to a
chrysanthemum-viewing, and because he was so pleased with the poem Bao-yu
made at the party the other night, he wants to take him and the other young masters
with him. Have you got that message? Be as quick as you can, please. And tell him to
hurry. The Master is in the main room with Her Ladyship. They are waiting for Bao-yu
to come so that they can start their breakfast. Master Huan is there already, so be
quick. And someone take the same message to Master Lan, please.’
     ‘Yes, yes,’ said the women, hurriedly buttoning up their clothing, and two of
them hurried off to deliver it, one to Green Delights and the other to Sweet-rice
Village.
Aroma knew that something unusual must be toward for someone to be knocking so
early at the courtyard gate and called to one of the old women to go and find out
what it was while she herself got up and put her clothes on. When she heard the
message, she sent someone out for washing-water and roused up Bao-yu. She told
him to wash himself as quickly as possible while she went to fetch him some clothes.
Since it was Jia Zheng he was going out with, she chose his second best, judging his
best to be too showy.

    As there was now obviously no possibility of following out his original intention,
Bao-yu washed and dressed and hurried over to his parents’ apartment immediately.
When he got there be found Jia Zheng already sipping his wheatmeal tea and
apparently in very good humour. Bao-yu made his morning salutation to his parents
after which he in turn was greeted by Jia Huan and Jia Lan. Jia Zheng ordered the
three of them to sit down and drink their wheatmeal tea.
‘Bao-yu is not as diligent as you two in his schoolwork,’ he told the two younger
boys, ‘but he is much better than you at making up poems and couplets. No doubt all
three of you will be called upon to contribute poems at this place we are going to.
Bao-yu will have to help you out a bit.’
This was music indeed in the ears of Lady Wang, who had never before heard her
husband praise Bao-yu in such terms. She waited until Jia Zheng and the boys had
gone before getting up to make her morning call on Grandmother Jia; but before she
could get away, Parfumée foster-mother and two of the other foster-mothers came
in saying that there was something they wished to speak to her about.
‘Ever since Your Ladyship was good enough to let me take Parfumée home with
me,’ said Parfumée’s foster-mother, ‘she’s been refusing to eat and drink and
behaving like a crazy girl, and now Nénuphar and étamine are the same. The three of
them have been carrying on something dreadful, threaten?ing to kill themselves and
I don’t know what. All they want, they say, is to shave their hair off and become nuns.
Well, I thought, they’re only children; after a day or two they’ll get over this. But not
a bit of it: two days have gone by already and they’re worse than ever. Neither words
nor blows have an effect on them. We’re all at our wits’ end. We’ve come to ask Your
Ladyship if you will either let them have their way and go into a convent or else deal
with them as you see fit and hand them over to somebody else, because we can do
nothing with them.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Lady Wang impatiently. ‘It’s not for them to decide what is to
become of them. The Buddhist vocation is not to be undertaken on a mere childish
caprice. Give each of them a flogging and see if they misbehave then!’
It was the custom for nuns from the various temples which the Jia ladies patronized
to visit the mansion over the Mid?-Autumn festival bringing the first-fruits of their
offerings. Euergesia, the prioress of Water-moon Priory, who had come along with
the rest, had been invited to stay on for a few days and happened to be at hand
during this interview. This holy old fraud pricked her ears up when she heard of three
young persons wanting to become nuns. A few young novices to wait on her and help
about the priory were just what she was looking for. She set to work on Lady Wang
accordingly.
‘No doubt it is because this is such a blessed household (thanks to all Your
Ladyship’s good works) that these young people’s hearts have been turned towards
the faith,’ she said. ‘It is true that the Buddha’s gate is not to be entered lightly; but it
is also written that the Buddha’s truth is for all sorts and conditions of men. And not
only men, for when the Blessed Lord made his vow, it was to work for the salvation of
all sentient beings. These three young people have no parents and are far from the
place where they were born. Having had a taste of luxury during their years here with
you, yet being born to a lowly fate and trained in a profession that at best is vanity,
they cannot but tremble when they think what the future may hold for them. I
believe that is why, out of the midst of this sea of suffering, they have turned towards
the light and resolved to abjure the world and its vanities and prepare themselves for
the life to come. That is a noble decision, Your Ladyship. I don’t think you ought to
stand in the way of it.’
Lady Wang was a good woman at heart and had only opposed the young actresses’
determination to become nuns because she thought it proceeded from mere childish
waywardness and feared that when put to the test they would find the vows of
celibacy and abstinence too much for them and fall into mortal sin. But what the old
nun said sounded plausible; and besides, she was at this moment very much
preoccupied with other matters. Lady Xing had sent someone over to say that she
wanted Ying-chun to spend a few days with her so that she could be exhibited to the
representatives of a family seeking her in marriage, and Lady Wang herself was facing
a visit from an official match-maker who was coming to discuss the matrimonial
prospects of Tan-chun. She was far too worried by these other matters to be unduly
concerned about the fate of a few entertainers. The answer she gave Euergesia,
therefore, was a favourable one.
‘Very well then. Would you be prepared to take them as your disciples?’
‘Now blessings be upon you!’ said the old prioress. ‘It would be a holy thing if you
would let me, it would indeed. Praise his Holy Name!’
She pressed her palms together and bowed down almost to the ground.
Lady Wang turned to the three foster-mothers:
‘All right, go and ask them. If they are really serious about this, they can kotow to
Mother Euergesia in my presence and formally make themselves her disciples.’
The three women went off and presently reappeared, bringing the three girls with
them. Lady Wang questioned each of them closely about her decision and when she
was satisfied that they were utterly resolved to go through with it, allowed them to
make their kotows to the old nun. After that they kotowed to her. Now that she was
convinced of their determination and saw that nothing could deflect them from it,
she began to feel quite sorry for them and ordered the servants to get out various
things to give them. She also gave several presents to the prioress.
Thus Parfumée, Nénuphar and étamine left the sinful world behind them and went
off with Euergesia to embark on a new life at Water-moon Priory.
What followed thereafter will be related in the following chapter.
CHAPTER 78

Jia Zheng commissions the Ballad
Of the Winsome Colonel
And Bao-yu composes an Invocation
to the Hibiscus Spirit
After the departure of Euergesia and the three girls, Lady Wang was at last able to
make her morning call on Grandmother Jia. Finding the old lady in excellent humour,
she decided that this was as good a time as any to report on her recent activities.
‘There is a girl in Bao-yu’s room called Skybright,’ she said. ‘She is already of age;
she has been constantly ill during the past year; she gives much more trouble than
any of the others; and she is lazy. During her latest spell of sickness, which must have
been going on now for the better part of a fortnight, we’ve had her looked at by the
doctor and he says she’s got some kind of consumption - a kind that is quite common,
apparently, in unmarried girls; so I’ve sent her back to her own people and told them
that we shan’t be wanting her here again if she gets better, they can find a husband
for her themselves. I also took it upon myself to send away those young actresses.
For one thing, like most people trained in that profession, they use the most
appalling language I don’t think it’s very nice for the other girls to be exposed to it.
And for another thing, as we no longer require them to perform for us, which is what
they were trained for, I think it is only right that we should let them go. We have far
too many maids as it is. If Bao-yu or the girls need any more, we can supply them
from the regular staff; they don’t need young actresses to wait on them.’
Grandmother Jia nodded.
‘That sounds quite sensible. I had been thinking along those lines myself. About
Skybright, though: I always thought she was an excellent maid: she expressed herself
well; she was much the best needlewoman I ever had; I had been thinking of
eventually giving her to Bao-yu to keep. I’m sorry to hear she has changed so much
for the worse.’
‘I’m sure you were not mistaken in her,’ said Lady Wang, smiling. ‘Let’s just say that
the girl was not destined to be fortunate -.hence this perpetual sickness. “For a
growing girl there are eighteen hazards” the proverb says. Quite apart from that, I
think these very gifted people are apt to play up a bit, as I am sure you, Mother, with
all your rich experience must have noticed. Three years ago I, too, was thinking about
choosing someone permanent for Bao-yu, and to begin with I, too, thought of
Skybright as the likeliest choice. But after watching her very carefully, I came to the
conclusion that, although better qualified than the others in so many particulars, she
is not really a very dependable person. For all-round dependability I think Aroma is
very much her superior. I know they say “a wife for virtue and a concubine for
beauty”, but even in choosing a concubine I think the girl with a con?siderate nature
and a sense of responsibility is to be preferred. Aroma may not be as good-looking as
Skybright, but in other respects I should rate her qualifications as a chamber-wife
very highly. Her behaviour is so mature, and yet at the same time she is such a simple,
good-natured girl. During all the years that she has been with Bao-yu she has never
once misbehaved herself; in fact, whenever Bao-yu gets into one of his wild or silly
moods, she does her best to talk him out of it. I waited two whole years to see if she
was really as good as I thought she was, and when, at the end of all that time, I had
found no fault in her, I made a private arrangement to have her maid’s allowance
stopped and two taels paid to her each month out of my own allowance. Aroma
herself was the only person I told about this, because I thought she could do with the
encouragement. I deliberately kept it from everyone else, partly because if Sir Zheng
had got to hear about it he would almost certainly have said that Bao-yu was too
young for a chamber-wife and that having one would distract him from his studies,
and partly because if Bao-yu himself thought of her as a chamber-wife, he would be
less inclined to listen to her good advice and would become more ungovernable than
ever. That is the reason, Mother, why I haven’t told you about this before.’
‘I see,’ said Grandmother Jia, smiling. ‘Oh well, that’s all right then. Even better.
Aroma never had much to say for herself, in my recollection. I always thought her
rather a dull little stick. However, you obviously know her much better than I do. I’m
sure you can’t be wrong. I certainly think it very wise of you not to have told Bao-yu
himself about this, and I hope all of us here will continue to keep quiet about it. I am
sure you are right in thinking that he is the sort of person who, when he is married,
will never listen to a wife’s or a concubine’s advice. He’s a strange boy. I don’t really
understand him. I’ve certainly never known another one like him. His other kinds of
naughtiness I can understand; it’s this passion for spending all his time with maids
that I find so hard to make out. It used at one time to worry me: I thought it must be
because he had reached puberty and was having experiences with them; but after
watching him very carefully, I came to the conclusion that it wasn’t that at all. It’s
very, very strange. Perhaps he was a maid himself in some past life. Perhaps he ought
to have been a girl.’
Lady Wang and the others laughed. Lady Wang then went on to tell Grandmother Jia
how highly Jia Zheng had spoken of Bao-yu that morning and how he had taken
Bao-yu and the other two boys with him on an outing. Grandmother Jia was
delighted.
Not long after this Ying-chun appeared, dressed in her going-out clothes, to take
leave of Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang before going next-door to stay with Lady
Xing. Xi-feng called in, too, for her morning duty call and stayed to wait on the old
lady while she took her lunch and to joke with her for a while after it was finished.
When the old lady had settled herself down for her after-lunch nap, Lady Wang called
to Xi-feng to accompany her back to her own apartment. She asked her whether she
had started taking the ginseng pills yet. No, not yet, Xi-feng told her, because she was
still taking the infusions; but her aunt was not to worry, because she was now feeling
completely better. Observing that she certainly seemed to have got her old
cheerfulness back, her aunt was inclined to believe her. She told her about her
dismissal of Skybright and the other girls. This led her to another topic.
‘Why did your Cousin Chai go back home without telling anyone? Doesn’t anyone
know? When I was making my inspection yesterday, I decided to take a look at Wan’s
servants as well. That new nurse she has got for little Lan is quite un?suitable; in fact,
I don’t like the look of her at all. I said to Wan, “I don’t care how you do it, my dear,
but you must get rid of that woman at once. Lan is old enough to do without a nurse
now in any case. He certainly doesn’t need a nurse like that one!” I asked her if she
knew about Bao-chai. She said yes, Bao-chai had told her that she was going, but it
was only for two or three days, until her mother was better, and then she would be
moving in again. Well I know for a fact that there is nothing much wrong with your
aunt: a bit of a cough and some back-ache, but then she always gets that at this time
of year. I am sure there is some other reason for her leaving. Can anyone have
offended her? She is such a serious child. I should hate to think of anyone offending
her after our two families have been getting on so well together all these years.’
‘Who could possibly have offended her?’ said Xi-feng, smiling.
‘I wondered if Bao-yu might have done,’ said Lady Wang. ‘He is so careless about
what he says, so tactless. When he gets excited he is capable of saying almost
anything.’
‘I don’t think you have much to worry about on that account,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Bao-yu
may behave foolishly in com?pany, but when he is with our girls, or even the maids,
he is always extremely considerate. His greatest anxiety is always how not to offend
them. He is certainly the last person I should expect to hear any of our girls complain
about. I should think Cousin Chai’s leaving has much more to do with that search we
carried out in the Garden the other night. She would naturally infer from it that the
people in the Garden are not trusted; and since she knew we would never search her
people because of her position here as our guest, she might well conclude that the
only way in which she could clear them of suspicion would be to move outside. I’m
sure that’s why she went: to avoid suspicion.’
To Lady Wang, too, this seemed the most likely explanation. She studied the floor
thoughtfully for some moments; then she had Bao-chai summoned, explained to her
what had happened, and assured her that she must not think herself under the least
suspicion. She must move back into the Garden at once and continue living there as
before.
Bao-chai smiled courteously but held her ground.
‘I had been meaning to move out some time ago, Aunt, but did not like to mention
it to you because I knew you were so much occupied with other matters. It was the
coincidence of Mamma’s being poorly and her two most reliable maids both going
sick at the same time which decided me to move out when I did. Now that you know
about my leaving, I should like to ask formally for permission to move out my things.’
Lady Wang and Xi-feng both laughed.
‘You are too unbending,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Do, please, move in again. Do not allow a
trifle like this to come between us.’
Bao-chai smiled.
‘I assure you, Aunt, you are quite mistaken. It really isn’t because of what you think
that I am leaving the Garden. It is because Mamma has been in rather low spirits
lately and there’s no one but me for her to rely on during the night. And be?sides,
Pan is getting married shortly, and there is still a lot of sewing to do and household
things to get. Mamma badly needs to have me at hand all the time to help her with
the preparations. You know how things are in my family, so you know that I am not
making this up. And there is another reason. Ever since I first moved into the Garden,
the little south-east corner gate has been left open. This was done specially for our
convenience, but of course there is nothing to prevent anyone else using it who
wants to take a short cut. No one going through it is ever questioned. Now suppose
the wrong person got in by that way and something awful happened. It would make
it very awkward for all of us. When I first moved into the Garden it didn’t matter
much one way or the other if I spent the nights there. We were all very much
younger then and there wasn’t so much that needed doing at home. It seemed
better for me to be sewing or playing in the Garden with the other girls than moping
at home on my own. But now we are older it is rather different. I am sure that the
worries you have had during this past year or two have been aggravated by the fact
that the Garden is too big to keep all the time under your surveillance. Any reduction
in the number of people living there means some reduction in the number of your
worries. That is why I am not only determined to move permanently out of the
Garden myself, Aunt, but would seriously urge you to make whatever other reduction
in numbers may be necessary. You mustn’t think that for a great household like yours
to retrench would be undignified. Look how modestly we live nowadays. It was a very
different style we used to live in when I was a little girl.’
It was unusual for Bao-chai to speak at such length. When she had finished, Xi-feng
turned with an amused expression to Lady Wang.
‘I think you will have to let her have her way, Aunt. You can’t force her to move in if
she doesn’t want to.’
Lady Wang nodded.
‘I find what you say unanswerable,’ she told Bao-chai. ‘You will have to do as you
think best.’
While she was speaking, Bao-yu came in to report that he was back.
‘Father is still at the party,’ he said. ‘He told us to come back now because he was
afraid it might be going on much longer and he didn’t want us coming back in the
dark.’
‘I hope you didn’t disgrace yourself,’ said Lady Wang anxiously.
‘Not in the least,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Look at all the loot we’ve brought back!’
The old women from the inner gate who, as he entered, had relieved his pages of the
things they had been carrying, now came forward with them for Lady Wang to
inspect. There were three fans, three fan-pendants, three boxes of writing-brushes,
three boxes of ink-sticks, three rosaries and three jade belt-buckles: one of
everything for each of the three boys.
‘The fans and fan-pendants are from Academician Mei,’ said Bao-yu, ‘the ink-sticks
and brushes are from Vice-President Yang, and the rosaries and buckles are from
Under-Secretary Li.’ He fished out a little sandalwood Buddha-charm from inside his
jacket. ‘This is from the Duke of Qing-guo. He only gave one to me.’
Lady Wang questioned him about the other people who had been present and the
poems that had been composed. She told someone to take Bao-yu’s share of the
presents and go with him and the other two boys to see Grandmother Jia.
Grand?mother Jia was of course delighted, and Bao-yu found him?self having to
answer all the same questions over again. His anxiety to learn about Skybright made
him anxious to get away, and after answering a few of them, he told his grandmother
that he had been riding rather fast and was aching all over from his ride.
‘You must go back to your room at once then and change into more comfortable
clothes,’ she said. ‘You’ll feel better when you’ve had a chance to relax; but don’t,
whatever you do, lie down.’
Bao-yu left his grandmother’s without more ado. Musk and Ripple, with two of the
junior maids from Green Delights, were waiting for him outside. Ripple took charge
of his share of the presents and she and the other two trotted along after him as he
strode into the Garden.
‘Phew! I’m hot,’ he said, divesting himself of hat, belt and outer garment as he
walked along and handing them to Musk to carry. He was wearing a gown of lined
damask underneath, whose viridian green contrasted strikingly with the flashes of
blood-red trouser revealed through the side-slits as he walked along. Ripple
recognized the trousers as Skybright’s handiwork.
‘“Objects remind us”,’ she said, quoting from the well-known proverb. Musk
nudged her reprovingly and tried to change the subject.
‘Yes,’ she said lightly, ‘the red of the trousers goes very well with the dark green of
the gown. What with them and his blue-black boots and his greeny-black hair and his
snow-white face he makes quite a picture!’
Bao-yu, walking slightly ahead of them, pretended not to have heard; but after going
only a few steps further, he halted abruptly.
‘Oh dear, I have to pay a little call!’ he said. ‘What am I going to do?’
‘That’s all right,’ said Musk. ‘We’re not going to lose you in broad daylight!’
She told the two junior maids to go with him.
‘Ripple and I will come back for you when we’ve got rid of these.’
‘Can’t you wait?’ said Bao-yu. ‘I shan’t be a moment.’
‘Oh, do let us get rid of these things first!’ said Musk. ‘Whatever must we look like,
traipsing after you with all this stuff? Like the Wardrobe Master and the Clerk of the
Ink-horn in a royal procession!’
Bao-yu, who had been hoping that they would go, indicated that they might do so
and went off with the two junior maids to a secluded corner behind some rocks
where he could question them.
‘Did Aroma send anyone to Skybright’s place after I had gone?’
‘Yes, she sent Mamma Song,’ said one of the girls.
‘What did Mamma Song say when she got back?’
‘They told her that Skybright was lying with her head back calling out all night long,
but in the early morning she stopped calling and closed her eyes. They said it looked
as if she was going.’
‘Who was she calling for?’ Bao-yu asked hurriedly.
‘Her mother,’ said the girl. ‘They said she just went on calling “Mamma!”
“Mamma!” all night long.’
‘Didn’t she call for anyone else?’ said Bao-yu, brushing away a tear.
‘They didn’t mention anyone else,’ said the girl.
‘Oh, you’re a silly girl!’ said Bao-yu impatiently. ‘I’m sure you must have misheard.’
‘She certainly is a silly girl,’ the other little maid piped up. A sharp little creature,
she had sensed at once what Bao-yu was hoping for and was willing to supply it. ‘I
not only heard exactly what Mrs Song said; I even managed to slip out and see
Skybright myself.’
‘How did you come to do that?’ Bao-yu asked her.
‘Remembering how much kinder than any of the other senior maids Skybright had
always been to me,’ said the girl, ‘I thought to myself that though I couldn’t do
anything else for her in her trouble, I could at least go to visit her. Even if someone
saw me and reported me to Her Ladyship and I got a beating, it would be worth it
after all she had done for me. So, at the risk of a beating, I stole round to her cousin’s
place to see her. Although she was so near death, her mind was quite unaltered. She
held my hand and opened her eyes wide when she saw me. “Where’s Bao-yu gone?”
she said. When I told her, she sighed. “Oh,” she said, “I shan’t be able to see him,
then.” “Can’t you hold out a bit?” I asked her. She smiled at me. “No,” she said. “You
see, I’m not really dying; I’m going to heaven to be a flower-spirit. The Jade Emperor
has given me the job of looking after the flowers.” She said, “I have to leave at
half-past two to take up the job, and Bao?-yu won’t be home until a quarter to three,
so we shall miss seeing each other by only a quarter of an hour. Usually when people
are dying, King Yama sends his demons to fetch their souls, and if you want to delay a
bit, all you have to do is burn a bit of spirit money and make a little offering of some
rice and tea, and they will leave you alone for a few minutes while they go after the
money and stuff. But when the heavenly messengers summon you, it’s different. You
can’t keep them waiting for a single moment.” At the time I didn’t quite believe her,
but when I got back I kept my eye on the clock and sure enough it was exactly a
quarter to three, as she’d said it would be, when they told us you’d got back and we
were to go over and wait for you.’
‘You can’t read,’ said Bao-yu, ‘so you wouldn’t know about these things. But there
are in fact flower-spirits: I’ve read about them. Not only is there a spirit in charge of
all the flowers, but there are also lesser spirits in charge of each separate kind of
flower. I wonder which Skybright is going to be.’
The little maid quickly glanced round the Garden for inspiration. Her eye lit on some
hibiscus bushes which, this being now the second half of autumn, were already in full
bloom.
‘I asked her myself,’ she said. “‘Tell me what kind of flower you are going to be
responsible for,” I said, “so that after you are gone we shall know where and when to
make you offerings.” “I’ll tell you,” she said, “but you mustn’t let anyone else but
Bao-yu know about it. These are immortal matters which are supposed to be kept
secret.” Then she told me: the hibiscus flower.’
Bao-yu found nothing extraordinary in this. On the contrary, after hearing it, his
sorrow turned instantly into delight. He looked round and smiled happily as his eyes
rested on the hibiscus bushes.
‘Such a flower is worthy to be looked after by such a person!’ he said. ‘I felt sure
that someone of her qualities would have work to do in the world. But -’ he became
sad once more as he reflected - ‘although her sufferings are over, it still means that I
shall never see her again.’
Then it occurred to him that, though he had failed to be with her at the end, there
was nothing to stop him going to see her now and paying his last respects to her body.
After the five or six years she had been with him and all that she had done for him in
that time, he surely owed it to her. He hurried back to carry out this resolve, running
into Musk and Ripple on his way. They had just started out again to look for him.
Back at Green Delights he hurriedly dressed up again and, telling the girls that he was
going to pay a call on Dai-yu, slipped out of the Garden and made his way, on his own
this time, to the place where he had visited Skybright the day hefore, expecting to
find her laid out there in her coffin.
Skybright had died not, as the lying maid had said, that afternoon, but early in the
morning. As soon as she had breathed her last, the cousin and his wife had gone to
the mansion to tell Lady Wang in the hope of getting some money out of her for the
funeral. Lady Wang had given them ten taels and told them to get the body out of
the house as quickly as possible and have it cremated.
‘The girl died of a consumption,’ she said. ‘You mustn’t keep the body in the house,
whatever you do.’
Impressed by this advice, they had hurried off with the money and made
arrangements to have the body encoffined and carried to the burning ground outside
the city without delay. Skybright’s clothes and jewellery, worth between three and
four hundred taels, they kept for themselves: a nice little sum to put by for their old
age. When all the arrangements had been completed, they shut up the house and
accompanied the hearse outside the city to see the body cremated. Bao-yu arrived,
therefore, to find the house locked up and nobody at home. Once more frustrated,
he stood for some minutes gazing blankly at the door. Finally, since there was nothing
else he could do, he turned round and walked back to the Garden. The thought of
returning to his room was distasteful to him. He decided to call in at Dai-yu’s on the
way back; but Dai-yu’s maids told him that their mistress was out.
‘She’s gone to see Miss Bao,’ they said.
Bao-ya made his way to All-spice Court. To his surprise he found it silent and
deserted, and when he peeped inside, he could see that it had the empty, cheerless
look of an uninhabited house. He had a vague recollection of having heard some days
previously that Bao-chai was thinking of moving out; but he had been so busy with
homework during the past few days that it had gone out of his mind. Now it
appeared that she really had moved.
A sort of blankness came over him. Chess had gone. Picture had gone. Parfumée and
the other four little actresses had gone. Skybright was dead. Now, it seemed, Bao-hai
and her lot had gone, too. And though Ying-chun was supposed to have left only
temporarily, to judge from the number of visits made by match-makers during the
past weeks, it would not be very long before she was getting married. The Garden’s
little society was breaking up.
‘Oh well,’ he thought, ‘no good fretting about it now. I’ll go and enjoy Dai-yu’s
company for a while; and after that, I’ve still got Aroma to go back to. It looks as if we
three will soon be the only ones left.’
In that philosophical frame of mind he went back to the Naiad’s House; but Dai-yu
had still not returned. Just as he was wondering where else he could go, a maid from
Lady Wang’s apartment came up to him with a message from his mother.
‘The Master’s back now and wants to see you. He says he’s got a good subject for a
poem and you are to come at once.’
Bao-yu was obliged to accompany the girl to his mother’s apartment; but by the time
he got there, his father had already gone. Lady Wang ordered some of her women to
accompany him to his father’s study outside. He found Jia Zheng discussing the
highlights of the chrysanthemum-viewing party with his literary gentlemen.
‘Shortly before the gathering broke up,’ he was telling them, ‘there was some
discussion about an episode from the history of the last dynasty. It was a story in
which the romantic, the edifying, the heroic and the pathetic were all exemplified -
indeed, one of the most remarkable stories I have ever heard. Everyone present
agreed that it deserved a poem to commemorate it.’
‘Pray tell us the story,’ said the literary gentlemen, intrigued.
‘It seems that there was a member of the Imperial clan called Prince Heng,’ Jia
Zheng began, ‘who had gone out to become Military Governor of Qing-zhou. As well
as being a fanatically keen soldier, the Prince was inordinately fond of female
company, and in the free time left over from his official duties, found a way of
combining these two interests by recruiting a large number of beautiful young
women whom he had trained in military arts. Every day these young women would
be made to engage in mock combat and other warlike exercises for the Prince’s
entertainment. The most beautiful and also the most militarily accomplished of these
young women was a certain Miss Lin, who, because she was the fourth daughter in
her family, was known by the name of “Fourth Sister Lin”. Prince Heng thought so
highly of her that he gave her a colonelcy and put her in command of the whole
female troop. From then on he took to calling her “Colonel Winsome” or “the
Winsome Colonel”.’
‘How priceless!’ exclaimed the literary gentlemen rapturously. “‘The Winsome
Colonel”! What a marvellous com?bination! Surely this Prince Heng must have been
one of the most eccentrically romantic persons the world has known?’
‘One could certainly call him that,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘But there is stranger still to
follow.’
‘Stranger still?’ said the literary gentlemen with surprise. ‘Then this must be a very
strange tale indeed.’
‘In the second year of his governorship,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘a horde of bandits,
latter-day descendants of the Yellow Turbans and Red Eyebrows of the Han period,
swept over the whole of Shantung Province, looting and pillaging as they went. The
Prince, scorning to mobilize fully against an enemy whom he regarded as a mere
rabblement of sheep and curs, took the field against them himself at the head of only
a light force of cavalry. But the rebel leadership, by an unexpected combination of
cunning and low trickery, defeated him in two successive engagements. In the second
of these the Prince himself died fighting.
‘In Qing-zhou the civil and military authorities were in a panic.
“‘What could you or I hope to do when the Prince himself has failed?” they asked
each other, and began to make plans for yielding up the city to the rebels.
‘But Fourth Sister Lin’s reaction to the grim news was to gather her fellow-officers
together and address them as follows:
“‘Our beloved Prince’s goodness to us was such that we could never have repaid
even a small fraction of it as long as we lived. Now that he has laid down his life for
his country, I feel that we in turn ought to lay our lives down for him. Those who feel
as I do, follow me. Those who do not are free to leave now, while there is time.”
“‘We will follow you!” the girls cried with a single voice; and that night, under the
cover of darkness, they rode out from the walls of Qing-zhou into the midst of the
rebel camp. At first, because the rebels were unprepared, they succeeded in killing
and decapitating several of their leaders; but it was not long before those in the
camp realized that the raiders were a party of women who could easily be overcome
if offered determined resistance. Seizing their weapons and rallying themselves
together, they fell upon Fourth Sister Lin and her band with such ferocity that soon
the girls’ heroic vow to die for their Prince was fulfilled, for not a single one of them
was left alive.
‘The Emperor and the entire Court were deeply affected when news of this was
brought to them. It is to be assumed that a suitable person was then appointed to
command operations against the rebels and that the rebel horde melted away at the
first appearance of the Imperial forces - we are not concerned with that. But what of
Fourth Sister Lin, gentlemen? Do you not find her an admirable person?’
‘Admirable indeed!’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘And what a marvellous subject for
a poem! We must all of us try to make one up about her.’
One of their number took a writing-brush and inkstone and wrote down the story
almost exactly as Jia Zheng had told it, slightly modifying it here and there in the
interest of style, to serve as a short preface for their poem. When he had finished it,
he handed it to Jia Zheng for his approval.
‘Yes, that seems to me exactly as it should be,’ said Jia Zheng after glancing briefly
through it. ‘It was a preface rather like this one that started off the discussion at our
gathering. An Imperial directive was received at the Department yesterday asking for
a search to be made in the records of this and the preceding dynasty for hitherto
neglected instances of outstanding merit deserving some posthumous recognition.
No class of persons was to be excluded: monks, nuns, beggars, women and girls - all
were eligible. Wherever exceptional merit could be established, a brief account of it
was to be forwarded to the Board of Rites for inclusion in the list of
recommendations. The preface they were discussing at our gathering was a copy of
the account sent in by our Department to the Board. It was reading that preface that
gave those present the idea that they should write a “Winsome Colonel” poem in
commemoration of Fourth Sister Lin’s heroic loyalty.’
‘And very right that they should!’ said the literary gentlemen smilingly. ‘But what is
most admirable of all about this story is the tireless benevolence of the present Court
which led to the unearthing of this forgotten heroism. Surely this is a thing
unparalleled in any former age? The Tang poet’s line
This holy age, when nothing good’s omitted,
might almost have been written in anticipation of the present reign.’
‘Indeed!’ Jia Zheng nodded gravely.
By this time Jia Huan and Jia Lan had also arrived. Jia Zheng allowed the three boys to
look at the preface and then told them that he wanted a poem from each one of
them. He would award a prize to whoever completed one first and another prize for
the best poem.
Jia Huan and Jia Lan had several times recently been called upon to compose in
company and so were not unduly nervous on this occasion. After reading the preface,
all three boys went off into separate corners to think. Jia Lan was the first to finish a
poem and Jia Huan, fearful of being outstripped by his young nephew, made haste to
follow. The two of them had already written their poems out while Bao-yu was still
thinking. Jia Zheng and the literary gentlemen decided to look first at what the two
younger boys had written. Jia Lan’s contribution was in the form of a quatrain.
Fourth Sister Lin was the Winsome Colonel’s name:
She was beautiful and gentle, yet her valour none could tame.
In Qing-zhou where, her Prince to avenge, she threw her life away,
The very ground on which she fell is fragrant to this day.
The literary gentlemen praised the little poem enthusiastically.
‘For a young boy of his years to produce such a poem is proof of a highly cultured
upbringing,’ they said.
‘Childish prattle! Childish prattle!’ Jia Zheng laughed deprecatingly. ‘Still, for one of
his tender years it is quite a creditable effort.’
Next they read Jia Huan’s contribution. It was a Regulated Verse poem in
pentameters.
The lovely lady would not sit and grieve;
For sterner thoughts her warlike breast did fill.
She dried her woman’s tears and fearless rode
Through Qing-zhou’s gates to be killed and to kill.
‘However great the odds,’ she said, ‘I can
‘My debt repay, if not avenge this ill.’
The inscription graved upon her tomb shall be:
‘Here buried lies the world’s fidelity.’
‘Ah yes!’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘What a difference those few years between
them make! This is quite a different approach.’
‘I suppose it’s not too bad,’ said Jia Zheng, ‘but it doesn’t really do justice to the
subject.’
‘Oh well, as to that -!’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘After all, our young friend is not
so very much older than his nephew. Old heads are not to be expected on young
shoulders! Give them a few more years and I don’t doubt we shall have a pair of
poets in our midst to rival Ruan Ji and his nephew Ruan Xian!’
‘Come, come, they are not as good as that!’ said Jia Zheng, smiling. ‘They don’t
study hard enough, that’s their trouble.’
He asked Bao-yu how he was getting on.
‘After all this careful chiselling, Mr Bao’s poem is sure to be something of quite a
different order from these two we have just heard,’ said the literary gentlemen’ - one,
no doubt, in which the romantic and tragic aspects of the theme will both be fully
exploited.’
Bao-yu smiled.
‘I don’t think Regulated Verse is quite the right medium for this subject. It calls for
something longer - a song or ballad in the Old Style - to do it justice.’
‘You see!’ said the literary gentlemen, some jumping to their feet, some nodding or
clapping in their enthusiasm. ‘We said that his contribution would be quite different!
It is the sign of a good, experienced writer to be able to gauge immediately what
form will be most appropriate to the sub?ject. With a title like this and a preface,
clearly what is called for is either a long narrative poem like Bo Ju-yi’s “The
Ever?lasting Remorse” or an Old Style ode like Wen Ting-yun’s “On Hearing Guo
Dao-yuan Play the Musical Glasses” or Li He’s “Return from Gui-ji”, in which narrative
and lyrical elements combine. Only the greater freedom of the Old Style allows for
the smoother, more flowing development that this subject calls for.’
Jia Zheng was of the same opinion. He took brush and paper and prepared to write.
‘So be it, then. Recite your lines, my boy, and I shall take them down for you. They
had better be good after this boastfill preliminary, or I shall beat your bottom!’
Bao-yu recited his first line:
Prince Heng was fond of a pretty face and of martial arts also -
Jia Zheng copied the words down and then shook his head over what he had written.
‘Vulgar and pedestrian!’
‘No, no, it isn’t vulgar,’ said one of the literary gentlemen. ‘That is what the Ballad
Style is like. Wait and see how it goes on.’
‘All right, we’ll let it pass,’ said Jia Zheng.
Bao-yu continued.
So he trained the ladies of his court to ride and draw the bow.
In ravishing songs and beguiling dances the Prince took no delight,
But to watch the pike-drill he was fain of fair maids in a row.
He waited while Jia Zheng finished writing down the lines. The literary gentlemen
professed themselves particularly impressed by the ‘ravishing songs’ line, claiming to
see a quality of ‘rugged strength’ in it which they deemed highly appropriate in a
ballad. The fourth line, which they called ‘pure narrative’, was also, they thought,
exactly as it should be.
‘You shouldn’t praise the boy so,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘You will turn his head. Let’s see
how he manages to develop this in his second stanza.’
Bao-yu recited:
As he watched them drill, he scarcely saw the clouds of dust arise;
’Twas the lovely Colonel’s lamplit face that swam before his eyes.
‘Bravo!’ shouted the literary gentlemen. “‘He scarcely saw the clouds of dust” leads
us on to the “lamplit face” of the heroine. A most ingenious development! The way
every word is used in these two lines is quite masterful!’
Bao-yu continued:
When the rosy lips framed their harsh commands he could smell the mouth’s sweet
breath;
But the weapons oft shook in the fair white hands, too weak for such exercise.
The literary gentlemen laughed and clapped their hands.
‘What a wonderful picture! I think friend Bao must have been among those present
at the time. He saw the white hand shake and smelt the perfume. How else could he
describe it all so vividly?’
Bao-yu laughed.
‘Women drilling, however bold and fierce they might be, could never look quite the
same as men. One can assume the occasional softness creeping in without having
had any special experience.’
‘Oh, get on!’ said Jia Zheng. ‘We can do without the comment.’
Bao-yu thought a little before beginning the next stanza.
The lotus belt round the Colonel’s waist in a clove-shaped knot was tied –
     ‘The change of rhyme from “eyes” to “eyed” is one example of that smooth,
flowing development we were just now talking about,’ said the literary gentlemen.
‘Also, this line has just that touch of charm and prettiness that the subject calls for.’
‘I don’t agree,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘I don’t like this line at all. We have already heard
about her “mouth’s sweet breath” and her “fair white hand” in the last stanza. Why
does he need to go on in this strain? I think it is mere weakness of invention that
leads to this piling up of descriptive bric-à-brac.’
‘ A long ballad needs a few ornamental, descriptive passages,’ said Bao-yu,
‘otherwise it would seem too bare.’
‘You are continuing the same kind of description into a new stanza,’ said Jia Zheng.
‘When are you going to get on to her warlike side? If you have another two or three
lines of this kind of stuff, it’s going to seem like drawing legs on a snake!’
‘All right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’ll try to make a quick change to the warlike side and then
finish the whole description off in this one stanza.’
‘What a genius!’ said Jia Zheng sarcastically. ‘You begin with a line that looks like
the first item in a long catalogue, and now you are talking about instant changes and
abrupt conclusions. I think you may find that you have bitten off rather more than
you can chew!’
Bao-yu hung his head and pondered a while before finally coming out with this line:
Yet it was not strung pearls that hung from it, but the good sword at her side.
‘Will that do?’ he asked anxiously.
The literary gentlemen banged on the table and cheered.
‘We’ll leave it,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Carry on.’
‘If it will do, I’ll continue as I’ve planned,’ said Bao-yu. If not, it would be better to
cross it out and I’ll try to think of something completely different and develop in
another direction.’
Jia Zheng shouted at him angrily.
‘Hold your tongue, sir! Do it again if it’s not good enough, indeed! How many times
do you propose to go on trying? Ten times? A hundred? Save your energy and get
on!’
Bao-yu resigned himself to developing from the line he had just recited. He thought
for some moments before continning.
When late at night the jousting ended, her courage was quite spent,
And her handkerchief with carmine sweat from her streaming face was dyed.
‘That’s the end of another stanza,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Now how are you going on?’
Bao-yu continued:
Next year the whole North-east land with rebels was a-run,
Like ravening beasts, or swarming bees after the queen has flown –
      ‘ “A-run” is good,’ said the literary gentlemen. ‘It is little touches like that that
show the master-hand at work. The narrative style in this stanza is good, too. Lively.’
Bao-yu continued:
The Prince led forth the Emperor’s men the rebel hordes to quell.
  He fought them once and he fought them twice, but his army was overthrown.
A stench of blood upon the wind blighted the standing corn,
And on empty tents and an empty camp the setting sun went down.
*
‘Twas the rainy time, and sounding rills down the lone green hillsides sped
When Prince Heng, his fighting ended, on the battlefield lay dead.
Now rain has washed the white bones clean, but not the blood-soaked grass,
And as the moon rises, shivering ghosts stand at each corpse’s head.
‘Brilliant!’ cried the literary gentlemen. ‘The narrative style, the imagery, the choice
of words are all quite perfect. But now what about Fourth Sister Lin? What ingenious
new development will bring her back upon the scene?’
Bao-yu recited:
The officers refused to fight for fear they might be killed,
    And with no defenders, Qing-zhou’s fate seemed already to be sealed.
But though the men were all afraid, the girls were loyal and true:
And among them Prince Heng’s favourite with especial zeal was filled.
‘Neatly turned!’ said the literary gentlemen.
‘It took four lines to do it, though,’ said Jia Zheng. ‘Too much! And I expect there is
more useless verbiage to follow.’
Bao-yu continued:
Now who the Prince’s favourite was to you shall be revealed:
    Fourth Sister Lin she was by name, the Winsome Colonel called.
She rallied her companions fair and issued a command,
And like a troop of lovely flowers they rode into the field.
*
Their heavy saddle-cloths are wet with tears of the spring sky’s woe,
   And the iron of their armour chills them, as through the cold night they go.
Though the outcome may be uncertain; they have taken a solemn vow,
Whate’er befall, before they die, for the Prince to strike a blow.
*
But what chance against their savage foe had that gallant band?
Like gentle flowers they perished, crushed by a brutal hand.
The horses’ hooves are fragrant yet that trod them in the mud;
   Near the city walls their poor ghosts flit, where they made their final stand.
*
A courier riding through the night to the Emperor’s city came,
And all who heard his heavy news with sadness did exclaim.
The Son of Heaven looked aghast when he learned of Qing-zhou’s fall,
And his captains and his counsellors all hung their heads for shame.
*
The captains and the counsellors and men of high degree
Were put to shame by Fourth Sister Lin’s fidelity.
For Fourth Sister Lin my heart with grief doth swell,
And though my song is ended now, my thoughts on her still dwell.
The literary gentlemen broke into loud acclaim as Bao-yu finished. It seemed at first
as if they might go on indefinitely. Subsiding at last, they read the whole poem
through again from the beginning.
‘It is certainly a very long poem,’ said Jia Zheng, smiling, ‘but for all that, I don’t
think it really does justice to the subject.’
He turned to the three boys:
‘All right, off you go!’
The three of them went off, feeling like condemned prisoners who have suddenly
been given a reprieve. For the two younger ones it was the end of their day: a
blessed nothingness until bedtime. But Bao-yu was still grieving for Skybright. The
sight of the hibiscus by the lake reminded him of what the little maid had told him
about her. As he stood gaz?ing sorrowfully at the bushes, an idea suddenly came to
him.
‘Since I wasn’t able to see her in her coffin, why don’t I pay my last respects to her
here, in the presence of her flowers?’
He was on the point of kneeling down in front of them when another thought
occurred to him.
‘That’s all very well, but I can’t do it just anyhow. In order to show proper respect I
must first make sure that I am dressed correctly. And I must prepare a little ceremony
and make her some sort of offering.’
This led to further cogitation.
‘It says somewhere in the classics, “Where there is faith enough and goodwill,
duckweed boiled in puddle-water is an offering acceptable to the gods and a dish fit
to be set before princes.” Proper respect evidently has nothing to do with the value
of the offering. And I could always write something to read out before I made it.’
He began to plan what he would write. ‘An elegy’ it would be called. It would be a bit
like one of those long Chu poems – Li sao or The Summons of the Soul - but with
elements of other things as well. And of course a lot of it would be original. He sat
down and began writing it as soon as he got back to his apartment. As it was to
please himself, he could be as wild and extravagant as he liked and compose as
quickly as his imagination would let him. Soon the draft was finished, and he took a
piece of white material of the kind they call ‘mer?maid silk’, which he knew Skybright
had been fond of, and after first writing the title on it in large characters:
THE SPIRIT OF THE HIBISCUS:
AN ELEGY AND INVOCATION
he copied out the text in a neat kai-shu hand and carried it with him into the Garden.
The little maid who had told him about Skybright’s transformation had to follow him
with some things for the offering on a tray: a cup of tea, some autumn flowers in a
vase of water, and some charcoal in a little burner for starting a fire with. When his
solemn bowings and kneelings were over, he hung the silk up on the branches of a
hibiscus and began tearfully to read out the words:
The year being one in the era of Immutable Peace, the month that in which the
Sweet odours of hibiscus and cassia compete, the day, a heavy and doleful day, I,
most wretched and disconsolate JADE of the House of Green Delights, having with
due reverence prepared and got together buds of flowers, silk of mermaids, water of
the Drenched Blos?soms stream and Fung Loo tea (all things of little value in
themselves, yet sufficient to attest the devotion of a true believer) do here offer
them up in sacrifice to her that has now, in the Palace of the White God) become
SPIRIT OF THE HIBISCUS, having power and dominion over the flowers of autumn.
It is now sixteen years since the BLEST SPIRIT de?scended into the world of men. As
to her native place and the lineage in which she was born, they were long since
forgotten; but for five years and eight months of that time she was, in my rising up
and lying down, in my washings and combings, in my rest and play, my constant close
companion and helpmate.
It is to be recorded of her that in estimation she was more precious than gold or jade,
in nature more pure than ice or snow, in wit more brilliant than the sun or stars, in
complexion more beautiful than the moon or than flowers. Who of the maidens did
not admire her accomplishments? Who among the matrons did not marvel at her
sagacity?
But if baleful scritch-owls that hate the heights can cause the kingly eagle to be taken
in a net, and rank and stinking weeds, envious of another’s fragrance, can cause the
sweet herb of grace to be uprooted, it is not to be thought that a shrinking flower
could withstand the whirlwind’s blast, or a tender willow-tree be proof against the
buffetings of the tempest. When the envenomed tongue of slander was wagged
against her, she pined inwardly with a wasting sickness: the red of her cherry lips
faded and only sad and plaintive sounds issued out of them; the bloom of her apricot
cheeks withered and none but lean and haggard looks were to be seen upon them.
Slanders and slights crept from behind every curtain; thorns and thistles choked up
the doors and windows of her chamber. Yet truly she had done no infamous thing.
She entered a silent victim into the eternal, a wronged innocent into the everlasting:
a more notable martyr (though but a mere girl) to the envy of excellence than he
who was drowned at Long Sands; a more pitiable sufferer from the peril of plain
dealing than he that was slain upon Feather Mountain.
Yet since she stored up her bitterness in silence, none recognized the treasure that
was lost in her, cut off so young. The fair cloud dispersed, leaving no means to trace
the beauteous outline of its former shape. It were a hard thing to hunt out the Isle of
the Blest from among the multi?tudinous islands of the ocean and bring back the
immortal herb that should restore her: the raft is lost that went to look for it.
It was but yesterday that I painted those delicate smoke-black eyebrows; and who is
there today to warm the cold jade rings for her fingers? The medicine she drank
stands yet upon the stove; the tears are still wet on the garment she once wore. The
phoenix has flown and MUSK’s vanity-box has burst apart for sorrow; the dragon has
departed, and RIPPLE’s comb has broken its teeth for grief. The magpie has forsaken
my chamber: it is in vain for the maidens to hang up their needles on Seventh Night
and pray for nimble fingers. My buckle with the love-ducks is broken: the seamstress
is no more who could repair the silk-work of its girdle.
And this being the season of autumn when the power of metal predominates and the
White God is master of the earth, the signs themselves are melancholy. I wake from
dreams of her on a lonely couch and in an empty room. As the moon veils herself
behind the trees of the garden, the moonlight and the sweet form I dreamed of are
in the same moment extinguished; as the perfume fades from the hangings of my
bedchamber, the laboured breath and whispered words I strove to catch at the same
time fail silent. Dew pearls the pavement’s moss; the launderer’s beat is borne in
unceasingly through my casement. Rain wets the wall-fig; a flute’s complaint carries
uncertainly from a near-by courtyard.
Her sweet name is not extinguished, for the parrot in his cage under the eaves ceases
not to repeat it; and the crabtree in my courtyard whose half-withering was a
foretokening of her fate stands yet her memorial. But no more shall the sound of her
lotus feet betray her at hide-and-seek behind the screen; no more will her fingers cull
budding orchids for the game of match-my-flower in the garden. The embroidery
silks are thrown aside in a tangle: never again will she cut them with her silver
scissors. The sheeny silk lies creased and crumpled: never again shall her hot-iron
smooth out its perfumed folds.
In her last hour, when I might else have gone to her, I was called in haste from the
Garden by a Father’s summons; when, grieving, I sought to take leave of her
abandoned body, I could not see it because it had been removed by a Mother’s
command; and when I was told that her corpse had been consumed, I repented of
my jesting vow that we should share the same grave-hole together, for that were
now impossible, and that our ashes should commingle, for ash she is already
become.
In the burning-ground by the old temple, green ghost-fires flicker when the west
wind blows. On its derelict mounds, scattered bones gleam whitely in the setting sun.
The wind sighs in the tall trees and rustles in the dried-up grasses below. Gibbons call
sadly from tombs that are hidden in the mist, and ghosts flit weeping down the
alley-ways between the tombs. At such times must the young man in his
crimson-curtained bed seem most cruelly afflicted; at such times must the maiden
beneath the yellow earth seem most cruelly ill-fated.
The tears of Ru-nan fall in bloody drops upon the wind, and the complaint of Golden
Valley is made to the moon in silence. Vengeance is for demons and baleful bogles;
the gentle spirits of maidens are not wont to be jealous, though wronged. Natheless
shall the backbiters not lightly escape her; their mouths shall be squeezed in vices;
the hearts of those cruel harridans shall he ripped: for her anger is kindled against
them.
Though the bond between us was a slight one, yet can it not easily he broken; and
because she was ever close to me in my thoughts, I could not forbear to make
earnest inquiry concerning her. Thus it was revealed to me that the God had sent
down the banner of his authority and summoned her to his Palace of Flowers, to the
end that she who in life was like a flower should in death have dominion over the
hibiscus. At first when I heard the words of the little maid touching this appointment,
I thought them fantastical; but now that I have pondered them in my heart, I know
them to be worthy of perfect credence. How so?
Did not Ye Fa-shan compel Li Yong’s sleeping spirit to compose an epitaph? And was
not the soul of Li He summoned in order that he might write a memorial in heaven?
The circumstances may differ, but the principle is the same. God chooses his
ministers according to their capabilities, else how could they discharge the duties
that are required of them? And who more fit and meet than her to be given this
charge that has been laid upon her? Truly, here at last she has a work that is worthy
of her.
And because I would have her descend here in this place, I have composed these
verses to invoke her with, fearing that the common speech of mortals might be
offensive to her immortal ear.
The Invocation
All’s clearest azure above * where her team of white wyverns through the welkin
wends,
And the world in a haze below * as her chryselephantine car to the earth descends.
Her awning’s relucent splendour * outshines Antares and his starry band,
Her guidons and gonfalons go before * and the stars of Aquarius guard her on either
hand.
Cloudcleaver follows as escort * Moondriver gallops to clear the way ahead.
I can hear the creak and trundle of chariot-wheels * of her phoenix-figured car’s
majestic tread.
I can smell the enveloping perfume * of her cincture from fragrant stalks of asarum
twined,
See the dazzle of her dress * gleaming with moon-jade ouches, fretted and lined.
I’ll strew the altar with lily-of-the-valley leaves * and have water?-lilies for lamps fed
with orchid oil,
And in chalices cunningly fashioned from calabash * pour rarest metheglin flavoured
with penny-royal.
As I fasten my gaze on the clouds * methinks I see a faint glimmer of her face;
As I strain my ear on the silence * I seem to hear a faint echo of her voice.
But she, on a tryst with eternity, brooking no coarctation * has abandoned me, cruel,
here in the dust to lie,
Calling on Windlord in vain to drive me up after her * to ride side by side with her
across the sky.
My heart is all wracked with teen * yet it boots not to weep and wail:
You are gone now to your long sleep * against Nature’s order no power on earth can
prevail.
In the grave-vault secure you rest * the bourne after which there is no more
transformation.
But to me still in bonds in this hateful wen below * O Spirit, succouring come for my
consolation!
O Spirit, come and abide for my consolation!

But what though she is present in this place? She is girt about with silence;
she is veiled in a mist of invisibility; I cannot see her:

Only the green wreathed creepers that make her side-screens,
And the ranks of tall bullrushes, her guardsmen’s spears.
The sleepy willow-buds waken as she approaches;
And the bitter lotus-seeds sweeten as she nears.
The White Virgin waits for her on cliffs of cassia;
From Orchid Island the water-sprite comes to greet her.
Jade-player plays for her on a little organ,
And Cold-keys sweeps the iron spine with his metal beater.
The God of the Mid Peak’s consort comes at her bidding;
The crone of Li Mountain is summoned forth to meet her.
The Luo River turtle brings her his magic offering;
To the heavenly music wild beasts gambol and prance.
In the deeps of Red River the dragons are humming the melody;
And in pearl-tree groves the Birds of Paradise dance.

Seeing my reverence and my devoutness of heart (notwith?standing that I have
neither vessels of gold nor vessels of bronze in which to make my offering) she drove
forth her chariot from the City of Sunrise to meet me; but even now her banners are
returning to the Garden of Night. For a little moment it seemed that the invisible
would become visible; but murky vapours rose up suddenly between us and we were
cut off.

Clouds and mists drifted and drew together,
Rain and fog veiled the heaven’s light;
Then rolling back, revealed the high stars
And earth all radiant in the noon of night.

My mind is in a turmoil, uncertain whether I wake or dream. I gaze at the sky with
sighs of disappointmnent; I wait in uncertainty with weeping eyes. My speech grows
silent: only the music of the wind in the grove of bamboos is to be heard, and the
wing-beats of birds as they fly off startled, and the plopping sounds of fish as they
nibble at the surface of the water.
Blest Spirit, may my lament go up to thee; may my rite be acceptable to thee.
Wuhu aizai! Receive this offering!

When he had finished reading, he made a little flame with the burner and set fire to
the silk. Then he poured the tea out on the ground as a libation, scattered the
flowers, and emptied the water out of the vase. He continued to linger there after he
had finished, as though unable to tear himself away, and the little maid had to
remind him several times that they ought to be getting back. He had just started to
go when a laughing voice called out ‘Stop a minute!’ and the maid, turning to look
behind her, saw with terror that a female form was stepping out of the bushes.
‘Help!’ she cried. ‘It’s a ghost! Skybright’s spirit really has come back!’
Bao-yu looked back too. But whether or not it was a ghost he saw will be revealed in
the following chapter.




CHAPTER 79

Xue Pan finds to his sorrow that he is
married to a termagant
And Ying-chun’s parents betroth her
to a Zhong-shan wolf



At the end of the last chapter our story had reached a point at which, just as Bao-yu
and the little maid were beginning to walk away after completing the sacrifice to
Skybright, they were startled by the sound of a human voice coming from the
direction of the flowering hibiscus bushes. When Bao-yu looked, he saw that the
person who had called out was Dai-yu. She advanced towards him smiling.
‘A highly original elegy! It deserves to have a permanent place in literature
alongside the Elegy for the Shaman’s Daughter by Han-dan Chun!’
Bao-yu blushed and laughed sheepishly.
‘Most elegies one sees are so stale and derivative, I thought I’d try my hand at
writing something a bit different. It was only for my own amusement; I hadn’t
intended that anyone else should hear it. Perhaps now that you have heard it, you
will let me know of any glaring errors you may have noticed and help me to correct
them.’
‘Where is the original text?’ said Dai-yu. ‘I should need to have a careful look at the
text first before venturing on any criticism. It was such a long piece, I could barely
make out what most of it was about. There were a couple of lines somewhere near
the middle that caught my attention:

The young man in his crimson-curtained bed must seem most cruelly afflicted;
And the maiden beneath the yellow earth must seem most cruelly ill-fated.

The general sentiment is all right, but I thought “crimson-curtained bed” a trifle
shop-worn. I don’t see why you used that image when there is a much better one to
hand.’
‘Oh, what’s that?’ said Bao-yu.
‘We’ve all got this rose-coloured haze diaphene in our windows,’ said Dai-yu.
‘Instead of “the young man in his crimson-curtained bed”, why not say ‘the young
man at his rosy-misted casement”?’
Bao-yu stamped his foot and laughed delightedly.
‘Excellent! How clever of you to have thought of it! It only goes to show that there
is always something to hand if only one will take the trouble to look. Stupid people
like me fail to think of the obvious. Actually though, I haven’t got that sort of gauze in
my windows; so though “rosy-misted case?ment” is a great improvement, I don’t
think I had better use it. It would be fine for you to use it, but I think if I did it would
be a bit presumptuous.’
‘But why?’ said Dai-yu, smiling. ‘My window is your window. It is unfriendly to be
so punctilious. Look at the ancients who used to “lend furs and horses and feel no
resentment when they came back the worse for wear”. And that was to mere
acquaintances: we two are members of the same family.’
‘I agree with you that one ought to share with one’s friends,’ said Bao-yu, ‘and not
only furs and horses, but even more precious things if one has them. But for a mere
male to arrogate to himself what properly belongs to you girls would be quite a
different matter. It would be better to alter “young man” and “maiden” and let it be
your elegy. After all, you were always very well-disposed towards Skybright. I’d rather
give the elegy to someone else than throw away your “rosy-misted casement”. Let’s
make it:
The mistress by her rosy-misted casement must seem most cruelly afflicted;
And the maid beneath the yellow earth must seem most cruelly ill-fated.

I should be very happy to alter it in that way, even though it would mean that the
elegy would cease to have anything to do with me.’
‘She wasn’t my maid,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It doesn’t make sense. Besides, “mistress” and
“maid” are such an unpoetical combination. I might want to use this version when
Nightingale is dead, but that won’t be for a long while yet, I imagine.’
‘Come now, it’s not very nice to talk about Nightingale dying,’ said Bao-yu, laughing.
‘You started it,’ said Dai-yu.
‘I know what,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’ve got a still better solution. Why don’t we just say:

I by my rosy-misted casement seem most cruelly afflicted;
And you beneath the yellow earth seem most cruelly ill-fated?’

Dai-yu momentarily changed colour; yet though the words filled her with an almost
unbearable feeling of premonitory dread, she masked it with a smile and nodded
approvingly at his suggestion.
‘Yes, that’s a great improvement. Better not tamper with the words any more or
you will spoil them. You ought in any case to be getting back now. I’m sure you must
have more important things to attend to. When I saw your mother just now, she was
briefing someone to tell you that you are to go to your Aunt Xing’s place first thing
tomorrow morning. It seems that your Cousin Ying’s betrothal has been decided on. I
expect they want you there for the ceremony.’
‘What’s the hurry?’ said Bao-yu, a trifle pettishly. ‘I’ve not been feeling particularly
well lately. I may not be well enough to go there tomorrow.’
‘How typical!’ said Dai-yu. ‘I should try to grow out of these childish ways if I were
you. You are getting too old -’
She broke off in a fit of coughing. Bao-yu at once became concerned about her.
‘There’s a nasty wind here. I don’t know why we are standing around in the cold
like this. We’d better be getting back now. There’s no sense in making ourselves ill.’
‘I ought to be going back now in any case,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It’s time I went to bed.
We’ll see each other again tomorrow.’
She began to walk away. Bao-yu began gloomily walking off in the opposite direction.
Suddenly it occurred to him that Dai-yu was unaccompanied and he told the little
maid to run after her and see her back to her apartment.
Back at Green Delights he found some old women with a message from his mother. It
was as Dai-yu had said. He was to go over first thing next morning to his Uncle She’s
house.

*

The family that Jia She was proposing to marry his daughter into was called Sun. They
were a Da-tong family whose menfolk had all, for several generations, been Army
officers. A former head of the family had placed himself under the patronage of the
Ning and Rong brothers, so their claim to a special relationship with the Jia family
was a strong One. Only one member of the family was at present living in the capital,
a young man called Sun Shao-zu who had been given the post of Military Provost in
the metropolitan garrison as an heredi?tary entitlement. He was a tall,
powerfully-built, impressive-looking young man; he drew a good bow, had a good
seat on a horse, and knew how to bear himself well in company and please those
whom it was important to please. Still under thirty and with his family’s not
inconsiderable wealth behind him, he had excellent prospects. Already the War
Department had marked him out for promotion. And he was unmarried. From every
point of view - the special relationship between their two houses, the Sun family’s
wealth, and the personality of the young man himself - Jia She regarded this as being
the almost perfect match and informed Grandmother Jia of his choice. Grandmother
Jia by no means shared his enthusiasm; however, after reflecting that the couplings
of young people are to a large extent fated and that, as Jia She was after all the girl’s
father, it was not really for her to interfere, she made some neutral response such as
‘I see’ or ‘Oh, are you?’ and left it at that.
Jia Zheng felt a much more positive antipathy to the match. He detested the Suns.
Though the connection between the two families was a long-standing one, it had
come about because Sun Shao-zu’s grandfather, who had been the worst possible
sort of social climber, had wormed his way into the patronage of Jia Zheng’s
grandfather and great-uncle for the sole purpose of concluding some dubious
business that he could not have brought off on his own. In Jia Zheng’s view they
lacked both education and breeding. He spoke to Jia She on two separate occasions
advising him very strongly against the match; but as Jia She refused to take the
slightest bit of notice, there was nothing much he could do.
Bao-yu had never met Sun Shao-zu before. Obliged to do so at his uncle’s place next
day and to make such small-talk as he was capable of, he was appalled, in the course
of conversation, to discover just how soon the marriage was to be: it seemed that
Ying-chun would be going to her husband’s house before the end of that year. When
some time later Lady Ying came over to tell Grandmother Jia that she now wanted to
move Ying-chun out of the Garden for good, he became even more depressed. That
strange apathy they had observed in him on previous occasions again came over him.
The news that Ying-chun would be taking four maids with her to the Sun household
provoked some stamping and groans and the remark that ‘five more decent people
were now lost to the world’; but it was only a momentary outburst.
He took to wandering about for hours on end in the neighbourhood of Amaryllis Eyot,
now shuttered and forlorn and with only one or two women of the night-watch on
duty in it. The very reeds and knotgrass along its banks and the caltrops and
pondweed in the water seemed to have taken on a wilting, dejected look, as if they
too were missing the presence of their former tenant. All the charm and colour
which had once endeared the spot to him seemed now to have abandoned it. So
strong was this feeling, that it eventually began forming itself into a poem, the words
of which came almost unbidden to his lips.

The pool’s pink-petalled lotus crowns have gone,
By one night’s nipping wind of autumn blown;
Like stricken mourners, knotgrass and caltrop-heads
Under the weight of frost and dew bow down;
And the board whose Go-stones clicked the long day through
With mud of sluttish swallows is blotched brown.
Old poets for parted friends made such a din:
What grief must mine be then for closest kin?

Just as he had finished reciting this poem, Bao-yu heard a laugh behind him.
‘What are you mooning about for this time?’
Bao-yu glanced back and saw that it was Caltrop. He turned to greet her.
‘My dear Caltrop! What brings you here today? You are becoming quite a stranger
in this Garden.’
Caltrop clapped her hands as if she found his question a great joke.
‘I am always longing to come here,’ she said, ‘but now that your Cousin Pan is home
again, I am no longer a free agent. Just now Mrs Xue was trying to get hold of Mrs
Lian and they told her that she was in the Garden. I asked for the job of going to look
for her simply as an excuse for coming here. I have just seen Mrs Lian’s maid and she
told me that her mistress is with Mrs Zhu in Sweet-rice Village. I’m on my way there
now. Tell me, how is Aroma these days? And how was it that Skybright died so
suddenly? What was wrong with her? And Miss Ying - she moved out very suddenly,
didn’t she? Just look at this place, it already looks deserted!’
Bao-yu did his best to answer her. He also invited her to accompany him back to
Green Delights and have some tea there.
‘I can’t at the moment,’ said Caltrop. ‘Wait till I’ve seen Mrs Lian and given her my
message and I’ll come and see you then.’
‘What’s this important message that you are in such a hurry to give her?’ said
Bao-yu.
‘It has to do with your Cousin Pan getting married.’
‘I see,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Who did they finally settle on? They seemed to be wrangling
about it for months. It seemed to be Miss Zhang one day, Miss Li the next, and the
day after that Miss Wang. One wondered what the unfortunate girls had done to
deserve being considered for such a fate.’
‘Well you can forget about them now,’ said Caltrop, ‘because it’s all been settled.’
‘What family does the one they’ve chosen belong to?’ said Bao-yu.
‘A family that was related to our family by marriage once before,’ said Caltrop.
‘Your Cousin Pan called in on them last year during his travels. They are Imperial
Purveyors like us, registered with the Ministry of Finance, and one of the wealthiest
families in the capital. All your folk here seemed to have heard of them when we told
them. In fact everyone in the city, from Imperial Princes to shopkeepers, has heard of
the Cassia Xias.’
‘Oh,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Why do they call them that?’
‘They are, as I say, very, very rich,’ said Caltrop, ‘and they own a great deal of land.
Several hundred acres of their land are devoted just to growing cassia alone. All the
cassia sold in shops in the city is supplied by them, and all the cassia, both cut
flowers and potted plants, on display in the Palace. That’s how they got the nickname.
Old Mr Xia that used to be head of the business is dead now. There’s only his widow
left and a young Miss Xia. No son. It’s sad to think that the family may die out.’


‘Spare your sorrow,’ Said Bao-yu. ‘What about this young lady? Why did Mr Xue
take a fancy to her?’
‘Partly I suppose it was because they were destined for each other and partly it was
a case of “beauty in the eye of the beholder”,’ said Caltrop smiling. ‘Years ago when
they were little and their two families were often visiting each other, your cousin and
Miss Xia used to play together and call each other’s parents “Auntie” and “Uncle”.
When your cousin went to call on them last year, Mrs Xia, having no son of her own
and seeing him now for the first time as a grown-up man, felt more as if she was
welcoming a long-lost son. She was quite overcome, laughing and crying by turns;
and of course she insisted that he and her daughter should see each other. Well it
seems that the daughter has grown into a great beauty, and is educated, too, having
been taught by a private tutor. Your cousin was quite bowled over. Mrs Xia even had
the older men from the shop who were travelling with your cousin to stay with her.
They must have spent three or four days in her house. She’d like to have kept them
even longer and they had quite a job persuading her that they needed to be getting
back. When they did get back, your cousin could speak of nothing else. Almost as
soon as he’d set foot in the door he was telling Mrs Xue that she must get him the
young lady for his wife. Mrs Xue was quite agreeable. She’d seen Miss Xia when she
was a little girl, and she knew the families were well-matched. So after talking it over
with Her Ladyship and Mrs Lian, she sent someone to see Mrs Xia about the
betrothal and it was settled almost immediately. The only snag is, they’ve fixed the
date for the wedding a bit on the early side, which means a terrible rush to get ready.
Still, I’m longing for her to be here. Think of it: another person to write poetry with!’
‘Hmn, maybe,’ said Bao-yu. ‘All the same, I am a bit worried for you.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Caltrop. ‘I’m afraid I don’t understand you.’
‘I should have thought it was obvious enough,’ said Bao- yu. ‘Isn’t there a fear that
if somebody else appears on the scene Cousin Pan will lose interest in you?’
Caltrop’s face reddened and she stared back at him coldly.
‘What sort of talk is that? I used to think that we respected each other, you and I.
Now I am beginning to understand what people mean when they say that you are
the kind of person with whom it is impossible to be friendly.’
She turned on her heel and walked away, giving him no chance to reply.
A sense of desolation came over Bao-yu. It was as if a part of him had been
irretrievably lost. For some minutes he stood vacantly staring after her, like an idiot.
Returning at last in great dejection to Green Delights, he shortly afterwards went to
bed. But he did not sleep well that night. Several times in the course of it he called
out Skybright’s name in his sleep or woke up in terror from some frightful dream. His
body next morning was feverish and he seemed to have lost all appetite for food and
drink.
The events of the past few weeks - the raid on the Garden, Chess’s dismissal,
Ying-chun’s departure, Skybright’s death and all the attendant humiliation, shock and
grief had been too much for him. They now combined with the effects of the chill he
had taken in his recent loiterings in the autumnal Garden to lay him on his back for
several weeks. Grandmother Jia came over daily to Green Delights to visit him and
Lady Wang began to regret that her concern about Skybright had caused her to deal
with him so harshly. However, she gave no outward indication of this change of heart
beyond renewing her orders to the womenservants to take special care of him. Twice
every day the doctor called to take his pulses and. supervise his dosing. It was a
whole month before he began to show signs of improvement, and even then the
doctor insisted that he would require a hundred days of convalescence before he
could return to a normal diet or be allowed to set foot outside his courtyard.
The restraints of this period of convalescence, during which all his amusements had
to be taken inside his own room, soon proved extremely irksome. By the time forty
or fifty of the hundred days had gone by, he was already fairly exploding with
impatience; but all his pleading and all the ruses he adopted to get the sentence
altered were in vain. Both Grand?mother Jia and Lady Wang were adamant. Resigned
at last to another fifty days of confinement, he concentrated his energies on thinking
up ever more ingenious and outrageous ways in which he and his maids could pass
the time.
News reached him in his confinement of the superb plays and banquets with which
Xue Pan celebrated the arrival of his new bride. Everyone said she was good-looking,
and not only that, but literate and able to write a tolerable hand. Bao?-yu would
have given anything to go over and meet her; but of course he could not.
Not long after that came news of Ying-chun’s wedding, and Bao-yu realized with a
pang that the affectionate, brother-and-sister-like relationship of their childhood
years was now at an end: from now on, even if they ever met, they would have to be
formal and distant with each other. It made him doubly despondent when he
reflected that he had not even been able to see her before she left. However, he
decided to keep his troubles to himself. For the time being he continued to
con?centrate on thinking up new ways of passing the time. At least there was one
good thing about his confinement: he no longer had Jia Zheng urging him and
threatening him about his studies. During those hundred days of convalescence he
and the maids all but took Green Delights apart. No form of diversion was too wild or
hare-brained for him to try, and things were done then that cannot have been
thought of before or since. We will not tax the reader’s credulity by attempting to
describe them.
*
After delivering her snub for what she mistakenly believed to be a deliberate
rudeness, Caltrop decided that in future it would be best to keep away from Bao-yu
as much as possible, even to the extent of avoiding visits to the Garden altogether.
This was not difficult, since she was at the time fully occupied with preparations for
Xue Pan’s wedding.
Caltrop had persuaded herself that when there was another woman in the house -
someone who would take a share of the responsibilities and whose authority she
herself could fall back on - life would be somehow easier for her than it was at
present. The young lady Xue Pan was marrying was said to be not only beautiful but
educated; it followed, in Caltrop’s reasoning, that she must be gentle and ladylike as
well. Caltrop awaited her arrival even more impatiently than Xue Pan, and resolved
to serve her, when she came, with all the devotion and care of which she was
capable.
The young lady of whom Caltrop entertained such high expectations was still only
seventeen. It is true that she was not at all bad-looking; she could even read quite a
number of words; and if subtle deviousness of character had been an examinable
qualification, she might have come out a good second to Xi-feng. Her chief drawback
sprang from the fact that she had lost her father at a very early age; and as her
widowed mother had no other child of her own and doted on her excessively, she
had been thoroughly spoiled. By treating her every whim as law and gainsaying her
nothing, her mother had turned her into a monster. In her own estimation Miss Xia
was a bodhisattva; all other creatures were as dust beneath her feet. The exterior she
presented to the world made one think of the flowers in spring; underneath it there
were light?nings and tornadoes. At home, in the bosom of the family, her maids
learned to gauge the severity of her tantrums: if she was only slightly vexed, she
would curse them; if she was gravely displeased, they would be beaten. As for her
views on matrimony: Miss Xia - or Xia Jin-gui to give her her full name - considered
that if she wanted to be mistress in her own house, it behoved her to put her
maidenly modesty and the gentleness that was habitual with her aside and show a
little authority. It would be necessary to keep the others in their place. Xue Pan in
particular, because of his wilfulness and intransigence, must be broken in as quickly
as possible, or she would never be able to establish her dominion and plant her flag
in this new territory. The discovery that there was a beautiful and intelligent young
concubine in this household she was entering aroused feelings in her akin to those
expressed by the founder of the Song dynasty when he likened the world to a
bedroom and declared that none but he should snore in it.
Because of her name ‘Jin-gui’, which means ‘cassia’ and the abundance of
cassia-trees cultivated by her family, Xia Jin-gui had always insisted on strict
avoidance of the syllables ‘jin’ and ‘gui’ and the word ‘cassia’ by her maids and any
other inferiors who had to do with her. Of course, cassia?flowers had from time to
time to be referred to somehow or other, so, bearing in mind the myth about the
cassia-tree that grows beside the palace of Chang E in the moon, she decreed that
cassia should always be referred to in her presence as ‘Chang E’s flower’. The notion
that in doing this she was in some way conferring on herself the status of a
moon-goddess was perhaps not entirely absent from her mind. At all events, the
luckless maid who carelessly let out a ‘jin’ or a ‘gui’ in her presence or who was
incautious enough to utter the dread word ‘cassia’ was in for a savage beating and
would probably lose her pay for a month or two as well.
Now Xue Pan was one of those fickle natures always ready to be ‘off with the old love
and on with the new’; and in spite of all his bluster, he was only pot-valiant, having
little stamina, or stomach either, for a long-drawn-out trial of strength. While the
novelty of his marriage still lasted, he was, in any case, only too willing to defer in
everything to his beautiful young bride. Jin-gui quickly grasped what sort of person
she had to deal with and exploited her advantage to the utmost. During the first
month of their marriage things stood about equally between them, but by the end of
the second month Jin-gui’s star was definitely in the ascendant.
One day, after drinking rather more than was good for him, Xue Pan went to see
Jin-gui about something he wanted them both to do. On meeting with determined
opposition to his proposal, he finally lost patience with her and, after some angry
shouting, walked out on her in a temper. Jin-gui wept abandonedly, refused to eat or
drink, and eventually succeeded in persuading everyone that she was ill. A doctor
was sum?moned who pronounced her to be suffering from a ‘collision of blood and
air’ and prescribed a lenitive medicine to ease the clogged passages of the breath.
Aunt Xue gave Xue Pan a furious dressing-down.
‘You’re a married man now and soon you’ll be a father. I don’t know how you can
carry on like this. Here’s a girl as rare as a phoenix chick, a beautiful, delicate creature,
reared up with I don’t know how much loving care by her family - they only let her
marry you because they thought you had enough human decency to look after her
properly - and what do you do? Instead of making an effort to control yourself and
settling down to live in peace and harmony with her as a husband ought to do, you
carry on just as you always did, drinking too much and treating the girl like a
barbarian. So now we have to spend money on expensive doctor’s bills and put up
with this quite unnecessary anxiety, all because of you.’
Xue Pan felt thoroughly remorseful after this lecture and went back to Jin-gui to try
and make it up with her. But Jin-gui had heard the lecture too and was encouraged by
it to behave even more outrageously than before. Xue Pan’s pacific overtures were
ignored. He had to humble himself still further. It took a fortnight of patient
wheedling to talk his wife into a more satisfactory frame of mind. By that time the
self?-assurance that had once been characteristic of him was very much in abeyance.
Having already, in this first encounter, caused her husband to lower his colours and at
the same time discovered that her mother-in-law was harmless, Jin-gui began
pressing forwards in quest of yet further victories. At first she would do no more than
consolidate her ascendancy over Xue Pan; then, using her feminine charms to make
him her instrument, she would extend her dominion over Aunt Xue; and finally
Bao-chai too should be brought under her control. But Bao-chai saw through her
sister-in-law’s little game very quickly and was able to meet ruse with ruse - even, by
means of an occasional quiet but well-placed remark, to give her ambitions some
check. Finding that she was not to be taken with cunning, Jin-gui began looking for
occasions for a direct confrontation with her; but as Bao-chai was equally careful not
to give her any, she was for the time being obliged, albeit reluctantly, to treat her
with respect.
One day, having nothing better to do, Jin-gui engaged Caltrop in conversation. When,
in answer to her questions, Caltrop told her that she had no recollection of her home
and parents, Jin-gui was displeased. She felt sure that Caltrop knew really but was
withholding the information out of malice.
‘Who gave you the name “Caltrop”?’ she asked her.
‘Miss Bao,’ said Caltrop.
Jin-gui sneered.
‘People are always saying how clever your Miss Bao is. I can’t see that she showed
much cleverness in choosing you that name.’
‘If you say that of Miss Bao,’ said Caltrop warmly, ‘it must be because you have
never had occasion to test her knowledge. Even Sir Zheng has often spoken
admiringly of Miss Bao’s learning.’
Jin-gui’s reaction to that remark will be related in the chapter which follows.




CHAPTER 80

Unfortunate Caltrop is battered by
a philandering husband
And One Plaster Wang prescribes for
an insufferable wife



Jin-gui reacted to Caltrop’s defence of Bao-chai’s intelli?gence with a toss of the head,
a scornful curl of the lip and a couple of loud, contemptuous sniffs.
‘ The flowers that girls are named after are supposed to be beautiful,
sweet-smelling ones. What is there beautiful or sweet-smelling about a
caltrop-flower? If you’re going to call caltrop-flowers sweet-smelling, then what are
you going to say of the flowers that are really fragrant? It’s a ridiculous choice for a
name.’
‘But caltrop-flowers are sweet-smelling,’ said Caltrop. ‘A lot of water-plants are.
Even lotus-leaves and lotus-pods have a certain fragrance - not to be compared with
the scent of flowers, perhaps; but in very still weather, especially very early in the
morning or very late at night, they have a delicious, cool fragrance that is in some
ways superior to that of flowers. Even caltrops themselves and cock’s heads and the
roots and leaves of reed-grass have a lovely fresh scent after dew or rain; it makes
you feel good just to smell it;’
‘To hear you speak,’ said Jin-gui, ‘anyone would think that orchid and cassia were
not particularly fragrant.’
Caltrop, warming to the argument, momentarily forgot Jin-gui’s taboo.
‘Ah now, orchid and cassia are quite different,’ she began; but before she could get
any further, Moonbeam was pointing a finger in her face and crowing over her in
malicious triumph:
     ‘You’ll catch it now! That’s the mistress’s name you’ve just said.’
     Caltrop was overcome with confusion and hurriedly apologized for her lapse.
     ‘I’m truly sorry, madam. It was a slip of the tongue. I hope you won’t hold it
against me.’
     Jin-gui smiled magnanimously.
     ‘Oh, that doesn’t matter. You don’t need to worry about that. About this name
of yours, though: I really don’t think that “Caltrop” is very appropriate. I should like
to change it, but I don’t know whether you would be willing to let me.’
     ‘Oh, madam, what a thing to say!’ said Caltrop, smiling. ‘I am your chattel, to do
with exactly as you wish; who am I to be willing or unwilling? If you wish to change
my name, my name already is whatever you wish to change it to!’
     Jin-gui smiled, somewhat unpleasantly.
     ‘You may say that, but I fear your Miss Bao may be rather less happy about it.
     ‘Ah no, madam. You see, when I was bought by the family, I used first to work for
Mrs Xue: that’s how Miss Bao came to give me my name, not because I was Miss
Bao’s own maid. Then after that I served the master. Miss Bao has nothing to do with
me - especially now you are here. In any case, she’s a very sensible young lady - not
at all the sort of person to make a fuss about a little thing like this.’
      ‘Very well,’ said Jin-gui: ‘in that case, since a water-lily is a much more
appropriate flower to name someone after than a caltrop, I think we ought to call
you “Lily”.’
      ‘Very good, madam, let that be my name then,’ said Caltrop, smiling.
      “Lily” she became then from that moment. Bao-chai, when she heard about it,
appeared totally unconcerned.
      Xue Pan was in some respects like the general of old in whom ‘conquest did but
breed appetite for further conquest’, for when, after his marriage to Jin-gui, he
discovered that she had an attractive, rather coquettish maid called Moon?beam, he
was continually calling to her to bring him things - cups of tea and the like - so as to
have an opportunity of flirting with her. Moonbeam perfectly well understood what
he was up to but had to behave circumspectly from fear of Jin-gui, whom she studied
carefully for some sign which would indicate how she wanted her to respond.
     Jin-gui had indeed noticed Xue Pan’s interest in her maid and reasoned within
herself as follows.
     ‘I’ve been wanting to deal with Caltrop, but so far haven’t found a way of getting
at her. Since he’s already taken a fancy to Moonbeam, I might just as well let him
have Moon?beam, because he’s sure to grow cooler towards Caltrop as a
consequence and I shall be able to take advantage of that in order to get rid of
Caltrop; and with Caltrop out of the way, settling Moonbeam’s hash ought to be easy,
because Moonbeam is my own servant.’
     Having decided on a strategy, she had only to await a suitable opportunity of
putting it into practice. Such an opportunity occurred one evening when Xue Pan,
having drunk himself into a state of cheerful inebriation, called as was his wont to
Moonbeam to bring him some tea. While Moonbeam was handing him the cup, he
deliberately gave her fingers a squeeze; Moonbeam, with a very unnatural
affectation of modesty, drew back her hand; and since neither of them had their
minds on what they were doing, the cup crashed to the floor, splashing hot tea over
Moonbeam’s skirt and everything else round about. Xue Pan tried to cover up his
embarrassment by pretending that Moonbeam had not handed him the cup properly,
while Moonbeam for her part said that the master had not ‘taken a proper hold’.
     Jin-gui hooted at them contemptuously.
     ‘You two really are a comedy! You must think I’m an idiot.’
     Xue Pan hung his head and laughed sheepishly and Moonbeam fled blushing
from the room when, not long after this, it was time to go to bed, Jin-gui tried to turn
Xue Pan out of the bedroom and make him sleep elsewhere. She said she was tired of
seeing him go around all the time looking as if he was wasting away with passion.
Xue Pan smiled foolishly and said nothing.
     ‘If you want to do something, why don’t you tell me?’ she said. ‘All this groping
in corners will get you nowhere.’
     Encouraged by her words and fortified by what he had drunk against any feeling
of shame, he knelt down on the bed-covers beside her and seized her hand.
     ‘Listen, lover,’ he said: ‘if you will let me have your Moonbeam, I’ll give you
anything you ask for - anything at all. If it’s human brains you want, I shall see that
you have them.’
     ‘What nonsense you talk!’ said Jin-gui. ‘What do I care who you go to bed with?
Just don’t make a fool of yourself by carrying on in front of the others, that’s all I ask.’
     Xue Pan was so pleased and grateful that it seemed he would never stop
thanking her. That night he performed his conjugal duties with exemplary
thoroughness. Every sinew was strained to give Jin-gui pleasure. He did not go out
next morning, but hung around at home, waiting for an opportunity of exploiting his
new-found licence.
      A little after midday Jin-gui rather pointedly went out in order to leave the coast
clear. Xue Pan lost no time in setting to work on Moonbeam, who, since she now had
a pretty good idea of her mistress’s intentions, put up only a token resistance to his
advances. Carnal congress seemed imminent. But Jin-gui had been waiting for this
moment only in order to frustrate it.
      Jin-gui had a maid called Orfie who had been with her in her mother’s house
since she was a child. Orfie had lost both her patents when she was little and had no
one else to look after her, so when she first entered service with the Xias, she was
invariably referred to as ‘the little orphan’. Her name ‘Orfie’ was simply a convenient
contraction of this. Orfie’s duties were normally of a rough and menial kind, but on
this occasion she was employed by her mistress on a task requiring some finesse.
      ‘Orfie,’ said Jin-gui, ‘do you think you could tell Lily to fetch my handkerchief
from my room and bring it to me? You needn’t let her know that it was I who sent
you.’
      Orfie went off to look for Caltrop.
      ‘Miss Lily,’ she said when she had found her, ‘the mistress has left her
handkerchief in her room. Why don’t you go and get it for her?’
      Caltrop had recently been puzzled by Jin-gui’s hostility, and, in her efforts to
overcome it, was constantly thinking of things that she could do to please her. Since
Orfie’s suggestion seemed to offer a means of winning favour, she sped off without a
second thought to do the errand, bursting into the room at the very moment when
Xue Pan and Moonbeam were in the interesting situation we have just described. She
turned back, blushing to the tips of her ears, but not in time to escape the notice of
the other two.
      Xue Pan himself was fairly unconcerned. Jin-gui was the only person he feared,
and as Jin-gui had given her consent, he cared nothing about what anyone else might
think. He had not even bothered to shut the door. But Moonbeam minded very much.
Being by nature a disputatious, somewhat self-righteous young woman, she found it
peculiarly galling that Caltrop of all people should have seen her at such a moment.
Pushing Xue Pan away from her, she ran out of the room, protesting, with cries of
angry complaint, that he had been attempting to rape her.
      The effect of this upon Xue Pan was that all the excitement generated by his
tussling with Moonbeam was transformed into animosity against Caltrop. He rushed
outside and spat at her.
     ‘Little harlot! What do you man by it, wandering around the place like a
damned disembodied ghost?’
     He might have done her an injury, but Caltrop, sensing that she was in mortal
danger, ran as fast as her legs would carry her and managed to get away. Abandoning
the chase, he went back to look for Moonbeam but could find no trace of her. This
increased his anger against Caltrop, whom he cursed once more in her absence. After
dinner that evening, when he had once again drunk himself merry, he decided to
take a bath. On testing the water with his foot and finding it to be too hot, he insisted
that Caltrop had done it deliberately, intending to harm him, ran after her, stark
naked as he was, and gave her a couple of kicks. Caltrop had long grown unused to
such savage treatment; but things had now reached such a pass that she dared not
complain and ran off to weep alone and nurse her injuries in silence.
     Meanwhile Jin-gui had secretly instructed Moonbeam to place herself at Xue
Pan’s disposal that very night in Caltrop’s bedroom. She ordered Caltrop to move in
with her, and when she refused, said she supposed that it was because she found her
room dirty or was too lazy to wait on her at night. She pretended to think that it was
Xue Pan who had inspired her refusal.
‘That master of yours is such a barbarian,’ she said. ‘He has only to look at a girl to
want her for himself. Now he’s taken my maid away, yet he won’t let me have you in
her place. What’s his idea, I wonder? Does he want to drive me to my death?’
Xue Pan, for whose ears this was, of course, intended, became apprehensive that the
difficulties Caltrop was making might once more prevent him from enjoying
Moonbeam, and he came rushing into Caltrop’s room to rebuke her.
‘Don’t you realize, this is an honour your mistress is doing you? You do as you’e told
and sleep with her, or I’ll give you a beating!’
Caltrop had now no choice but to roll up her bedding and carry it into Jin-gui’s room.
Jin-gui told her to make her bed up on the floor. This order too she had to obey. As
soon as she had settled down for the night, Jin-gui called to her for some tea. Caltrop
brought her the tea and lay down again. A little after that Jin-gui called to her to
come and massage her legs. And so it went on, seven or eight times in the course of
the night, so that it was impossible for Caltrop to get right off to sleep or even to rest
properly.
Now that Xue Pan had got Moonbeam, he was like a man who has come into
possession of a priceless jewel. He forsook all other interests for her. This secretly
enraged Jin-gui, who could not forbear some jealous mutterings when she was on
her own.
‘Enjoy yourself while you can, my friend,’ she would say. ‘I shall get round to you in
the end. And when I do, you had better not complain!’
For the time being, however, she refrained from outbursts and set about laying a trap
for Caltrop. About a fortnight after Caltrop moved into her room she suddenly
pretended to be ill. She complained of agonizing pains in the heart and appeared
unable to move her limbs. Nothing they did for her seemed to bring relief. The
servants said it must have been brought on by something Caltrop had done to upset
her.
A couple of days later, as one of the maids was shaking out Jin-gui’s pillow, a cut-out
paper mannikin fell out of it. It had the eight symbols of her nativity written on it and
five needles sticking into it, one in the heart and one in each of the limbs. This item
of news was thought sufficiently inter?esting to be reported to Aunt Xue, instantly
throwing that poor lady into a highly inflammable state of nervous com?motion. The
effect the news had upon Xue Pan was even more violent. He was for having all the
servants flogged immediately until one of them confessed to having planted the
paper figure; but Jin-gui prevented him.
‘Why make the innocent suffer?’ she said. ‘I expect it’s Moonbeam who did it, to
get me out of the way.’
‘That’s most unfair,’ said Xue Pan. ‘When, during this past week or two, has
Moonbeam had the time to go inside your room?’
‘Who else could it have been then?’ said Jin-gui. ‘I suppose you don’t think I’d do it
to myself? Moonbeam is the only one who’d dare go in my room.’
'But Lily’s been in here with you all the time,’ said Xue Pan. ‘She must know, if anyone
does. She’s the one to flog if we want to find out.’
‘What’s the good of flogging anyone?’ said Jin-gui. ‘They’ll never confess anything.
If you ask me, you’d much better pretend you haven’t heard about it and let the
matter drop. When all’s said and done, it doesn’t much matter if I die. You can always
find yourself a better wife when you feel like it. If we’re going to be honest, the fact
of the matter is, you all three hate me, don’t you ?’
She began crying bitterly. Xue Pan was so enraged that he snatched up a door-bar
and rushed off in search of Caltrop straight away. He began hitting her with it as soon
as he found her, on the head, on the face, on the body, shouting accusations at her
but giving her no chance to deny them. Aunt Xue came running out in answer to
Caltrop’s anguished cries and shouted to him to stop.
‘How can you beat the girl like that without first making an attempt to find out
what has happened? She’s given us years of faithful service: it’s unthinkable that
she’d do a thing like that. Time enough to start laying about you after you’ve made a
serious attempt to get to the bottom of it.’
When Jin-gui heard her mother-in-law saying this, she was afraid that Xue Pan might
weaken. Her crying rose in pitch into a sort of plaintive yell.
‘You have monopolized Moonbeam now for over a fortnight and refused to let
anyone but Lily sleep with me. You rush to Moonbeam’s defence when I say you
ought to flog her, and now you get in a temper and start beating Lily. I don’t know
why you don’t stop all this play-acting and get rid of me; then you will be free to pick
a really rich, good-looking girl to marry.’
Her words had the intended effect of further inflaming Xue Pan. Aunt Xue could see
that her son was being manipu?lated and was thoroughly disgusted by the
unscrupulous way in which Jin-gui maintained her hold on him. But what could she
do? She knew the weakness of her son’s character and realized that his subservience
to Jin-gui had already become a habit. Evidently he had seduced Jin-gui’s maid, that
much was clear; yet Jin-gui was one moment accusing him of forcibly ‘monopolizing’
the girl, while the next moment she seemed to claim credit for deferring like a good
wife to his wishes. And who could be responsible for the black magic? The proverb
says that even the wisest judge will hesi?tate to pronounce on household matters.
Adapting it to the present circumstances, it might be said that even a parent finds it
difficult to pronounce on the marital problems of his offspring. Aunt Xue, certainly,
felt quite helpless when con?fronted with those of her son. She could only shout at
him in exasperation.
‘Worthless creature！Even a dog would behave in a more seemly manner than you
do! Now, it seems, you have got your muddy paws onto your wife’s own maid that
she brought with her from her home. You’ve heard her yourself accusing you of
taking the girl away from her. How are you going to show your face anywhere when
other people get to hear about it? And this other business: Heaven only knows who
is responsible; yet here you go, lashing out at this poor child here before making the
slightest effort to find out what really happened. We all know what a fickle creature
you are, but really! What a return for the years of loyal service she has given you! I
don’t care how dissatisfied you are with her, you ought not to beat her. I’ll get a
dealer here right away and have her sold; that’s the only way to settle this. Then you
won’t be troubled by her any more. Come, girl!’ she said to caltrop, ‘get your things
together and come with me.’ She turned to the other servants. ‘Quickly now, go and
get the dealer! It doesn’t matter what we sell her for; just let’s get rid of this - this
thorn in the flesh, and perhaps we shall have a bit of peace again in this household!’
Xue Pan, seeing that his mother was really angry, stood with bowed head throughout
this tirade and made no attempt to reply. It was Jin-gui’s strident wail from inside the
window that answered her.
‘Whether you want to sell the girl or not, Mrs Xue, I think you might leave me out
of it. Are you implying that I’m such a vinegar-wife that I can’t tolerate an inferior?
And what do you mean, “thorn in the flesh”? Thorn in whose flesh? Even if I did hate
her so much, I wouldn’t let him have my own maid to replace her with.’
‘What sort of manners are these?’ Aunt Xue was trembling all over and her voice
was choking. ‘Since when did it become acceptable for a young woman to shout at
her mother?-in-law through the window? I was under the impression that you had
been brought up in an educated household. All this shouting and screaming - I can’t
make out what you are trying to say.’
Xue Pan stamped his foot and shouted at Jin-gui despair?ingly.
‘Oh stop, stop! You’ll have everyone laughing at us.’
Jin-gui, thinking, no doubt, that having gone so far she might as well go all the way,
only shouted the louder.
‘Why should I care if people laugh at us? Your darling chamber-wife has been trying
to do me in. Is this a time to start worrying about whether people are laughing at us
or not? Why don’t you keep her and sell me instead? Everyone knows how rich the
Xues are and how they make use of their money in order to trample on other people.
And everyone knows about their fine relations who will always step in and slap
anyone down for them who is giving them trouble. What are you waiting for? I don’t
know why you married me in the first place if you find me so unsatisfactory. I’m sure I
didn’t ask you to come running round to our house, begging and entreating my
mother to let you have me as your wife.’
     She rolled about on the bed, weeping and screaming and beating her bosom.
Xue Pan was beside himself. Whether he rebuked her, reasoned with her, beat her, or
begged her to be silent, it seemed unlikely that anything he did would have much
effect. He could only stump in and out of the room, sighing and groaning
inarticulately, and concluded by exclaim?ing, with great bitterness, that he was ‘a
very unlucky man’.
     Meanwhile Bao-chai had persuaded her mother to come indoors. Aunt Xue
continued to insist that Caltrop must be sold. Bao-chai smilingly expostulated.
     ‘People like us don’t sell servants, Mamma, we only buy them. I think anger is
interfering with your judgement. What would people think if they heard that we
were planning to sell a servant? They would laugh us to scorn. If Pan and his wife are
dissatisfied with Caltrop, let her stay here and work for me. I could do with another
maid.’
     ‘If we keep her, it will seem to them like a provocation,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Much
better send her away and be done with it.
     ‘I can’t see that it makes any difference,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Provided she never goes
into the front part of the house, then as far as they are concerned, it will be just as if
she had been sold.’
     Caltrop was already at Aunt Xue’s feet begging to be allowed to stay and
protesting her willingness to serve Bao-chai as a maid. Aunt Xue was obliged to
relent.
     From now on Caltrop spent all her time with Bao-chai and stopped going into
the front part of the house altogether. She had at least security now; but for all that
she was not entirely happy. Sometimes on fine, clear nights she would gaze
wet-checked at the moon; at other times she might be heard unaccountably sighing
to herself while she trimmed a lamp.
The fact was that although she had lived with Xue Pan for several years, she had
never borne him a child. Some defect in the blood had made her unable to conceive.
And now she was ill too. The effect of all the emotional and physical outrage to which
she had recently been subjected was that a flood of fiery humour was released into
her liver, leading eventually to a drying up of the menstrual fluid. She became very
thin, yet had lost all interest in food. The doctor was called in and medicines were
prescribed, but they seemed to do her no good.
Meanwhile Jin-gui had had several more scenes with her husband. Sometimes, when
drink had made him bold, Xue Pan would try to assert himself. Once or twice he went
for her with a cudgel or a knife; but Jin-gui only offered him her body to belabour, or
stretched her neck out and defied him to do his worst; and of course he could not; he
could only bluster. This soon became the established pattern of their quarrels. The
only result of it was that Jin-gui’s power over her husband grew all the stronger.
At this point Jin-gui began directing her attention on Moonbeam, picking on her and
finding fault with her. But Moonbeam was made of more inflammable stuff than
Caltrop. Up to now she and Xue Pan had got on together so swimmingly that she had
all but dismissed Jin-gui from her mind. Finding herself now under attack from that
quarter, she was unwilling to yield an inch and gave back as good as she got. When,
after a few slanging-matches, Jin-gui grew really angry and began not only to curse
her but to lay hands on her as well, she did not quite dare to return blow for blow,
but she put on a fine display of hysteria, shrieking, rolling about on the floor and
threshing about with her limbs. Thereafter she was constantly threatening suicide,
and at any hour of the day or night they might have to snatch knives or scissors from
her grasp or take down the noose which she had fastened for herself over a beam.
Between the two of them Xue Pan was driven half distracted. He could only look on
help?lessly while they quarrelled, until finally the rumpus got too much for him and
he would slip out of the house and take refuge elsewhere.
Sometimes in the intervals between quarrelling, if she was feeling cheerful, Jin-gui
would gather a few people together to play at dice or cards. She was inordinately
fond of gnawing bones, especially the bones of fowls. To satisfy this craving she had
ducks and chickens killed every day. The meat she gave to other people; it was only
the bones, crisp-fried in boiling fat, that she kept for herself, to nibble with her wine.
Sometimes, if the bone she was gnawing was giving her trouble and she grew
impatient, she would swear like a trooper.
‘That ponce and his poxy strumpet seem to enjoy themselves,’ she would say
self-pityingly. ‘Why can’t I get any enjoyment?’
Aunt Xue and Bao-chai no longer attempted to intervene. Now they could only sit in
their own room and weep in silence while they listened to the profanities next door.
Xue Pan was helpless. He bitterly regretted the brief madness which had led him to
chain himself to this demon wife. Soon everyone in the two mansions, both masters
and ser?vants, had heard about the Xues’ predicament and all felt sorry for them.
*
By this time Bao-yu’s hundred days of convalescence had ended and he was allowed
to go out. One of the first things he did was to call on Jin-gui. There was nothing
exceptionable in her behaviour or appearance on the occasion when he saw her: she
seemed to be just the same sort of delicate, flowerlike creature as all the other girls.
How did so beautiful a person come to have so appalling a character? It was a
mystery which continued to occupy him for some time after the visit.
When, a few days later, he called in to wish his mother good morning, his visit
happened to coincide with that of Ying-chun’s nurse. She brought distressing news
about Sun Shao-zu’s behaviour.
‘Whenever she is on her own, the young mistress does nothing but cry,’ said the
woman. ‘She’s longing for you to send for her so that she can enjoy a day or two of
freedom.’
‘I’ve been meaning for some days to send for her,’ said Lady Wang, ‘but so many
disagreeable things have been happening lately that I keep forgetting. Bao-yu spoke
to me about this when he got back from his visit the other day. Tomorrow is a good
day, according to the calendar. We will send for her tomorrow.’
     Just then a servant arrived from Grandmother Jia’s with a message for Bao-yu.
He was to go first thing next morning to the Tian Qi Temple to burn incense in
payment of a vow she had made for his recovery. Eager for outings after his long
confinement, he was hardly able to sleep that night for excitement.
Next day he rose at dawn, and as soon as he had washed and dressed, set off by
carriage, accompanied by two or three old nannies, and drove through the West Gate
of the city to the Tian Qi Temple outside the walls.
The Taoists of the temple had spent the previous day preparing the place for his
arrival. Because of his nervous disposition he did not care to get too close to the
hideous guardian deities and other horror-inspiring images for which this temple was
famous. As soon as he had presented the paper figures, spirit money, food and so
forth which constituted the offering, he withdrew to the residential part of the
temple and, alter taking lunch there, set off on a sight-seeing tour of the temple and
its precincts, accompanied by the old nannies and by Li Gui and the other grooms.
But the sight-seeing soon fatigued him and he withdrew to the monks’ quarters again
for a rest. The old nannies considered that it would be bad for him to sleep so soon
after eating and called in the Taoist priest-in-charge, Father Wang, to sit and talk with
him.
This Father Wang had knocked about the world in his time as an itinerant vendor of
panaceas and even now had his name-plate hung up outside the temple with an
impressive list of the pills, powders, plasters and potions that he was prepared, for a
consideration, to dispense. He was a frequent visitor at the Ning and Rong mansions
and was known to everyone there - as to everyone else outside - as ‘One Plaster
Wang’ from his habit of always concluding the patter with which he recommended
his medicaments with the same formula: ‘One plaster will suffice, ladies and
gentlemen; one single plaster will suffice.’
When One Plaster Wang arrived, Bao-yu was reclining on the kang looking
half-asleep and Li Gui and the others were doing their best to keep him awake.
‘Ah, Father Wang!’ they said as he entered. ‘You’ve come just in time. Everyone’s
always saying how good you are at telling funny stories. Won’t you tell one now for
our young master?’
‘I think I had better,’ said One Plaster Wang, smiling. ‘We don’t want him sleeping
after his lunch. The batter he’s lust eaten might start battering his insides.’
This was not a bad beginning. At least it made them all laugh. Bao-yu, laughing with
the others, got up and straightened out his clothes. One Plaster Wang ordered one of
his acolytes to ‘make some good, strong tea’.
‘Master Bao doesn’t want any of your tea,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Your room stinks of
medicine.’
‘O fie!’ said One Plaster Wang in comic outrage. ‘O monstrous imputation! Never
has medicine of any kind found its way into this room. Moreover, for the past three
or four days, ever since I heard your master was coming here, I have been burning
incense to sweeten it.’
‘I’m always hearing about your plasters,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Tell me, what sort of things
are they good for?’
‘ My plasters?’ said the old Taoist. ‘Ah, now you’ve started something! It’s
impossible to do them justice in a few words. To begin with, there are one hundred
and twenty different ingredients in the ointment I use on them. Some of them
domi?nate over the others like a prince over his subjects, some of them combine
with each other in equal strength; some generate heat, some coolness; some of
them are cheap and some expensive. Internally they stabilize and fortify the humours,
enrich the blood, stimulate the appetite, tranquillize the spirits, banish excessive heat
and cold, aid digestion and loosen phlegm; externally they regularize the pulses, relax
the muscles, draw out the old, corrupt flesh, promote new growth, expel rheums and
neutralize poisons. Their efficacy is miraculous, as you yourself may see if you ever
have occasion to use one.’
‘I can hardly believe that a single plaster can do so many things,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I
wonder if the trouble I am thinking of could be cured by one.’
‘My plasters will cure any illness you like to mention,’ said the old Taoist. ‘If they
don’t give you instant relief, you are at liberty to pluck me by the beard, slap my old
face, and pull my temple down! What is the illness you have in mind?’
‘Try and guess,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If you can guess right, I shall believe in the efficacy of
your plasters.’
One Plaster Wang thought for a bit.
‘Hmn, difficult.’ He smiled slily. ‘Of course, there are some things that it’s not very
convenient to use plasters for.’
Bao-yu told all the servants but Tealeaf to go out of the room.
‘This room is too small for so many people,’ he said. ‘The air in it is becoming foul.’
Tealeaf lit a stick of Sweet Dreams incense and Bao-yu made him sit close to him,
with the lighted incense in his hand, so that he could lean on him for support.
Watching this little pantomime, the cunning old Taoist had a sudden inspiration. His
face broke into a broad grin. Coming up closer to Bao-yu, he bent down and spoke
softly into his ear.
‘I think I’ve guessed. Could it be that you have started bedchamber exercises
already and are looking for a little something to help things along?’
Almost before he had finished, Tealeaf was shouting at him indignantly.
‘Get away with you! Dirty old man!’
Bao-yu had not understood.
‘What’s that?’ he asked Tealeaf, puzzled. ‘What did he say?’
‘Never mind what he said,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Silly rubbish!’
‘You’d better tell me yourself what it is, Master Bao,’ said One Plaster Wang,
unwilling to risk another guess.
‘The thing I want to know about is jealousy,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Could one of your
plasters cure a woman of being jealous?’
One Plaster Wang clapped his hands and laughed.
‘Now there you have me! Neither my plasters nor anyone else’s could do that!’
‘They are not such great shakes after all then,’ said Bao-yu, smiling.
‘I said plasters couldn’t,’ said One Plaster Wang. ‘I know of an infusion that might.
The only thing is, it would take rather a long time. There’s no lightning cure for
jealousy.’
‘What is this infusion called?’ said Bao-yu. ‘How do you make it?’
‘It’s called Pirum saccharinum,’ said One Plaster Wang. ‘You take one very good
autumn pear, two drams of crystal sugar, one dram of bitter-peel and three cups of
water and simmer them all together until the pear is soft. If the suf?ferer can be
made to eat one such pear, together with its juices, first thing every morning, she will,
eventually, be cured.’
‘I don’t think much of that,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I can’t see that working.’
‘If it doesn’t work the first time, perhaps it will by the tenth,’ said the old Taoist. ‘If
one year’s treatment is insufficient, she must persevere for a second. And so on. At
all events, these are wholesome ingredients. A pear prepared in this way is soothing
to the lungs and stomach, innocuous to the health, sweet to the palate, lenitive for a
cough and in every way agreeable. Sooner or later the woman will die; and as there
is no jealousy (that I know of) after death, it could be said that by that time she had
been cured.’
This set Bao-yu and Tealeaf off into fits of laughter. ‘Oily-tongued old ox’ they called
him.
‘Well, what’s the harm?’ said One Plaster Wang. ‘It’s only a bit of nonsense to stop
you sleeping in the middle of the day. Making you laugh is worth much more than
any medicine. Even my plasters are only tomfoolery. Do you think if I really had a
magic formula I’d be sitting here talking to you now? I’d have taken it myself long ago
and gone off to join the immortals.’
The hour of sacrifice had now arrived and Bao-yu was invited to offer his libation and
set fire to his paper hecatomb. What remained of the more substantial part of the
offering -the foodstuffs and the wine - was shared out among the Taoists and the
others present. Having completed what he came out for, he drove back into the city.
By the time he got home Ying-chun had already been back an hour or more. The
servants who brought her were being entertained to dinner before returning to the
Sun household. Ying-chun meanwhile was in Lady Wang’s room giving her and the
cousins a tearful account of her matrimonial troubles.
‘Sun Shao-zu is an out-and-out libertine. Gambling, drinking and chasing after
women are the only things he cares about. He has corrupted practically every maid
and young woman in the house. I have protested to him about it more than once, but
he only swears at me. He calls me a “jealous little whore”. He says that Father
borrowed five thousand taels from him and spent it all, and that though he has been
round time and again to ask for it, Father re?fuses to pay it back. Then he points his
finger at me and shouts: “Don’t put on the lady wife act with me, my girl! You’re no
better than a bought slave - payment in kind for the five thousand taels your old man
owes me - and if you’re not very careful I shall give you a good beating and send you
to sleep with the maids.” He says it was Great-grandfather who took the Initiative in
making the alliance between our families because theirs was so rich and influential,
so that by rights he ought to be Father’s equal. He says he was a fool to marry me,
because that makes Father his senior; and besides, he says, it has given people the
impression that he needed our help, whereas in fact quite the reverse is true.’
Ying-chun sobbed bittely while she told them this and the others wept as they
listened. Lady Wang did her best to comfort her.
‘He’s obviously an unreasonable man,’ she said; ‘but now that you’re married to
him, there’s really nothing to be done. I remember your Uncle Zheng speaking very
strongly against the marriage to your father, but your father was so set on it, he
wouldn’t listen. It’s a bad business. My poor child! I’m afraid it must be your fate.’
Ying-chun wept.
‘I can’t believe that it was my fate to be so unhappy. After losing my mother as a
tiny child, it seemed such bliss when you brought me here to live with Cousin Wan
and the girls. And now, after just a few years of blessedness, I am to end like this!’
Lady Wang tried once more to comfort her. She suggested that Ying-chun herself
should decide where she wished to sleep.
‘Since the very first moment I left I have been longing every minute of the day and
night to be back here with the girls,’ said Ying-chun. ‘And next to them I have missed
my beloved Amaryllis Eyot. If only I might spend another four or five days in the
Garden, I think I could die content. Who knows if I shall ever be allowed to come and
stay here again?’
‘Now, now, that’s a foolish way to talk!’ said Lady Wang. ‘A little jangling between
newly married couples is the commonest thing in the world. There is no cause at all
to be so tragic about it.’
She gave orders for the rooms on Amaryllis Eyot to be made ready as quickly as
possible, and told the cousins to keep Ying-chun company and do their best to
distract her from her troubles. She particularly impressed upon Bao-yu that no word
of this was to reach the ears of Grandmother Jia.
‘If I find that Grandmother has got to hear of this,’ she warned him, ‘I shall hold you
alone responsible.’
Bao-yu had to promise that he would say nothing.
That evening saw Ying-chun installed once more in her old apartment, with everyone
round her, cousins and ser?vants alike, doing their utmost to make her feel cherished.
Three days she spent in her old apartment in the Garden; after that she had to go
and stay with Lady Xing. Before doing so she called on Grandmother Jia and Lady
Wang to say good-bye. Her leave-taking with the cousins which followed was
extremely painful. It was all that Aunt Xue and Lady Wang could do to calm the young
people in their grief.
Ying-chun stayed two days with Lady Xing and it was to Lady Xing’s place that the Sun
family servants came to collect her. Needless to say, she felt little inclined to go with
them; but fear of her husband’s evil temper made her conceal her reluctance and
hurry over her leave-taking. Lady Xing had never been much interested in her
daughter’s welfare - during the two days that Ying-chun was with her she never once
inquired whether her relations with her husband were harmonious and the duties
required of her in her new house?hold not too onerous - and such expressions of
maternal sentiment as she may have indulged in at her departure were of only the
most perfunctory and superficial kind.
As to what followed her departure: to know that, dear reader, you will have to look
into another volume.