CHAPTER 41

Jia Bao-yu tastes some superior tea at Green Bower Hermitage
And Grannie Liu samples the sleeping accommodation at
Green Delights



‘THIS flower will to a pumpkin grow.’
As Grannie Liu of the flower-studded hair said this, gestur?ing with her hands to
suggest the size of the full-grown pump-kin, a shout of laughter rose from all those
present.
She drank the ‘pass’ cup.
‘To be truthful,’ she said, aiming for another laugh, ‘I’m but a clumsy body at the
best of times, and having drunk so much, I’m scared of breaking this pretty cup
you’ve given me. You should have given me a wooden one; then if I dropped it, it
wouldn’t matter.’
The others laughed; but Xi-feng pretended to take her seriously:
‘If you really want a wooden cup to drink out of, I can find you one. But I’d better
warn you. The wooden ones aren’t like these porcelain ones; they come in sets of
different sizes, and if we get them out for you, you’ll have to drink out of every one in
the set.’
Grannie Liu calculated.
‘I was only joking,’ she thought. ‘I didn’t think they’d really have any. When I’ve
dined with the gentry back home, I’ve seen many a gold and silver cup in their
houses, but never a wooden one. I expect these will be wooden bowls that the
children use. It’s a trick to make me drink a lot. Well, never mind. This stuff’s not
much more than sugared water anyway. It can do me no harm if I drink a bit extra.’
Having so reflected, she made reply
‘Very well. Let’s see them first though.’
‘Go to the inner room of the front apartment,’ Xi-feng told Felicity, ‘and fetch me
that set of ten winecups on the bookcase—the ones carved Out of bamboo root.’
          But before Felicity could go on her errand, Faithful made a
counter-proposal:
‘I know that set of yours they’re not very big cups, and in any case, you promised
her wooden ones and yours are only made of bamboo. Much better give her ten
boxwood ones and make her drink out of Them.’
‘All right,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Better still.’ So Faithful sent someone to fetch them.
The sight of these cups when they arrived both alarmed and delighted Grannie Liu.
What alarmed her was their size. The largest was as big as a small hand-basin and
even the smallest one was twice as big as the cup she held in her hand. What
de?lighted her was the consummate artistry of the carving. On each of the ten cups,
in smaller and smaller replicas, was the same landscape with little trees and human
figures in it and even some lines of minute ‘grass character’ writing and a tiny carved
representation of an artist’s seal.
‘I’ll take the smallest one,’ she said hurriedly.
‘Oh no!’ said Xi-feng, smiling. ‘These cups have never been used before, because
up to now we’ve never found any?one with a big enough capacity to drink from them.
Now that you’ve asked for them and we’ve been to the trouble of get?ting them out
for you, we must insist on your drinking from every one of them.’
‘I couldn’t,’ said Grannie Lin in a panic. ‘Please, Mrs Lian, don’t make me!’
Grandmother Jia, Aunt Xue and Lady Wang all realized that a person of Grannie Liu’s
advanced years could not possibly be expected to imbibe so huge a quantity of liquor
with?out the direst consequences, and laughingly pleaded for her.
‘Come now, a joke is a joke. You mustn’t make her drink too much. Let her just
drink from the largest one.’
‘Holy Name!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘Can’t I just drink from the smallest one, like I said? I
can take the largest one home with me and drink it up by degrees.’
The others laughed. Faithful, obliged to relent, ordered one of the larger, but not the
largest cup to be filled, and Grannie Liu, holding it in both her hands, began to drink.
‘Drink it slowly, now,’ Grandmother Jia and Aunt Xue counselled her. ‘Don’t make
yourself choke.’
Aunt Xue told Xi-feng to offer the old woman something to eat with her bowlful.
‘What would you like, Grannie?’ said Xi-feng. Just name it and I’ll feed you some.’
‘I don’t know the names of any of these dishes,’ said Gran?nie Lin. ‘Anything you
like. They all taste good to me.’
‘Give her some of the dried aubergine,’ said Grandmother Jia.
Xi-feng collected some between her chopsticks and held it up to Grannie Liu’s mouth.
‘There. I expect at home you eat aubergines every day. Try some of ours and see
what you think of it.’
‘You’re having me on,’ said Grannie Liu, when she had eaten the proffered mouthful.
‘No aubergine ever had a flavour like that. If it did, we’d give up growing other crops
and grow nothing but aubergines!’
‘It really is aubergine,’ the others laughingly assured her. ‘This time we’re not
having you on.’
‘Really?’ said Grannie Liu in some surprise. ‘Well, I couldn’t have had my mind on it
properly while I was eating it. Give me a bit more, Mrs Lian, and this time I’ll chew it
more carefully.’
Xi-feng took up some more from the dish in her chopsticks and popped it into
Grannie Liu’s mouth. After prolonged, reflective mastication Grannie Liu agreed that
there was indeed a slight hint of aubergine in the flavour.
‘But I still say this isn’t really like aubergine,’ she said. ‘Tell me the recipe, so that I
can make it for myself.’
‘It’s simple,’ said Xi-feng. ‘You pick the aubergines in the fourth or fifth month when
they’re just ripe, skin them, re?move the pulp and pips and cut into thread-fine strips
which you dry in the sun. Then you take the stock from one whole fat boiling-fowl,
put the dried aubergine-strips into a steamer and steam them over the chicken stock
until it’s nearly all boiled away. Then you take them out and dry them in the sun
again. You do that, steaming and drying, steaming and drying by turns, altogether
nine times. And it has to be dried until it’s quite brittle. Then you store in a
tightly-sealed jar, and when you want to eat some, you take out about a saucerful
and mix it with fried slivers of chicken leg-meat before serving.’
Xi-feng’s ‘simple recipe’ caused Grannie Liu to stick her tongue out and shake her
head in wonderment.
‘Lord Buddha!’ she exclaimed. ‘That’s ten chicken gone into the making of it. No
wonder it tastes so good!’
And having laughed a while over the recipe, she applied herself once more to the
wine and slowly drank it down. She continued to toy with the cup after she had
finished drinking, as though loth to put it down.
‘I do believe you haven’t had enough,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Have another cupful.’
‘Gracious goodness, that would be the death of me!’ said Grannie Liu. ‘No, I was
just admiring the carving on it. Beautiful. How could they do it so fine?’
‘Now that you’ve finished drinking from it,’ said Faithful, ‘why not tell us what
wood it’s made of?’
‘Ah now, that question doesn’t surprise me,’ said Grannie Liu. You young ladies
living in the lap of luxury wouldn’t know much about wood; but people like us that
live all our lives with the woods for neighbours, that lie on wood when we re tired
and sit on it when we’re weary and even have to eat it sometimes in years of famine:
seeing it and hearing it and talking about it every day of our lives, we naturally get to
know its different qualities and can tell the genuine from the imitation. Well now, let
me see.’
She turned the cup round a good while in her hands and contemplated it with great
attention before pronouncing:
‘A household like yours wouldn’t have anything cheap in it,’ she said, ‘so anything
wooden you’ve got would be made from a wood that’s not very easy to come by. And
this is a heavy wood, so it’s definitely not willow. I should say, with?out much doubt,
this is red pine.’
The loud laughter which greeted this pronouncement was interrupted by the arrival
of an old woman who reported to Grandmother Jia that the young actresses were in
the Lotus Pavilion awaiting instructions. Were they to perform now, or should they
go on waiting a little longer?
‘Bless me! I had completely forgotten about them,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Yes, tell
them to begin straight away.’
The old woman departed, and presently, in the cold, clear air of autumn, the
ululation of flutes rising above a drone of pipes and organs came stealing through the
trees and across the water, ravishing the hearts and minds of those who heard it.
Bao-yu, the first to be affected, seized his wine-kettle, poured himself a cupful of
wine, and drained it in a single gulp. He then poured himself a second cup; but just as
he was about to drink it, he noticed that his mother had evidently been affected in
the same way, for she was just at that moment giving orders to a servant to fetch her
a supply of freshly-heated wine. At once he crossed over to where she was sitting and
held his cup to her mouth for her to drink from.
Soon the newly-heated wine arrived and Bao-yu went back to his seat. Lady Wang
rose from hers and picked up the wine-kettle that had just been brought, intending
to pour some for Grandmother Jia. This was a signal for the others present, including
Aunt Xue, to rise from their seats as well; but Grandmother Jia hurriedly gave orders
for Li Wan and Xi-feng to take over.
‘Let your Aunt sit down, so that the others can be at their ease,’ she said to Xi-feng,
whereupon Lady Wang relinquished the wine-kettle and went back to her seat.
‘We’re having such fun today,’ said Grandmother Jia when Xi-feng had poured for
her. ‘All of you must drink!’
She raised her cup to Aunt Xue, then, reaching beyond her, to Xiang-yun and
Bao-chai.
‘Come on, you two! You must have a cup too. And your Cousin Lin - we’re not
letting her off. I know she can’t drink very much, but today is an exception.’
She drained her cup, and Xiang-yun, Bao-chai and Dai-yu drank something from
theirs.
Grannie Liu, meanwhile, who had seldom before heard such fine music and was
more than a little drunk, was showing bet appreciation of it with vigorous
movements of hands and feet. Bao-yu, catching sight of her, slipped from his seat to
whisper in Dai-yu’s ear.
‘Look at the old grannie!’
‘It reminds me of the passage in the History Classic about the animals dancing to
the music of Shun,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Only in this case it’s just one old cow!’
The other girls, overhearing this, all laughed.
After a little while the music stopped and Aunt Xue sugges?ted that as everyone
appeared to have had about as much to drink as was good for them, perhaps it
would be a good idea to break up and walk around for a bit. At this Grandmother Jia,
who was herself beginning to feel like some exercise, rose to her feet. The others
rose too and followed her outside.
Anxious to keep Grannie Liu with her as a source of diver?sion, Grandmother Jia took
her by the hand to walk with her among the trees at the foot of the rockery. She
spent a goodish while circumambulating this area with her, explaining what the
various trees, rocks and flowers were called. Grannie Liu listened very attentively.
‘Seems that in the city it isn’t only the folks that are gran?der,’ she remarked. ‘The
creatures too seem to be grander than what they are outside. Even the birds here are
prettier, and they can talk.’
‘What birds?’ they asked her, curious.
‘I know the one on the golden perch on the verandah—him with the green feathers
and red beak is—a polly parrot,’ she said defensively, ‘but that old black crow in the
cage he’s grown a thingummy on his head and learned to talk, as well.’
The ‘crow’ that she was referring to was a mynah. The others laughed at her mistake.
A little after this some maids came up and invited them to take a snack.
‘After drinking all that wine, I don’t feel hungry,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Still, bring it
here anyway, and those who want to can help themselves.’
The maids went off and returned carrying two small tables. A couple of food-boxes
followed. Each, when its cover was removed, was found to contain two different
kinds of delicacy. In the first box there were two kinds of steamed things: marzipan
cakes made of ground lotus-root and sugared cassia?-flowers, and pine-nut and
goose-fat rolls, The second box contained two sorts of fried things, one of them a
heap of tiny jiao-zi only about one inch long
‘What have they got inside them?’ Grandmother Jia asked.
‘Crab-meat, said one of the old women who had brought the boxes.
Grandmother Jia frowned.
‘I shouldn’t think anyone would feel like eating that now,’ she said. ‘Much too rich.’
The other type of fried confection consisted of a wide variety of little pastry-shapes
deep-fried in butter. These, too, met with the old lady’s disapproval. She invited Aunt
Xue to choose first. Aunt Xue selected one of the little cakes of lotus-root marzipan.
Grandmother Jia chose a goose-fat and pine-nut roll, but after merely tasting it,
handed the uneaten half to a maid.
Grannie Liu was fascinated by the delicately fashioned pas?tries. They had been
looped or perforated or criss-crossed in every conceivable shape and the soft dough
instantaneously hardened in boiling butter-fat. The one she had selected was shaped
like a peony.
‘The cleverest girl in our village couldn’t make a paper cut?out as fine as that,’ she
said, holding it up for the others to see. ‘It seems almost a shame to eat it. I’d like to
wrap up a few of these and take them home with me to use as patterns!’
The others laughed.
‘I’ll give you a jarful to take back with you when you go,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Eat
these ones now, while they’re still hot.’
The others contented themselves with nibbling only one or two of whichever
delicacies in the boxes took their fancy, but Grannie Liu and Ban-er, partly because of
the novelty (neither of them having eaten such things before), and partly because
the little pastry-shapes really were very pretty and, being heaped promiscuously
together, tempted you to go on eating them to discover what new shapes were lying
underneath, went on munching away until they had tried several of every shape, by
which time about half the pile had vanished. Xi-feng had what was left on the four
dishes heaped together onto two of them and put into a single box, and sent it over
to the Lotus Pavilion for élégante and the eleven other little actresses to eat.
Just then the nurse appeared carrying Xi-feng’s little girl, who at once became the
main focus of their attention. She was clutching a large grapefruit, but as soon as she
caught sight of the Buddha’s hand that Ban-er was holding, she decided that she
wanted that, and let up a wail when the maids who were attempting to coax it from
Ban-er could not procure it for her quickly enough. A resourceful cousin saved the
situation by hurriedly taking the grapefruit and inducing Ban-?er to make an
exchange. Ban-er had by this time been playing with the Buddha’s hand for quite a
long while and had more or less exhausted its possibilities; moreover at the moment
he had his hands full of fried pastry-shapes; and the grapefruit not only smelled good
but, being round, made an excellent football. For these three reasons he concluded
that it was an altogether more satisfactory fruit than the Buddha’s hand and
abandoned all interest in the latter.

*

When everyone had taken tea, Grandmother Jia, with the rest of the party following,
conducted Grannie Lin to Green Bower Hermitage, where they were met at the gate
by the nun Adamantina. Inside the courtyard the trees and shrubs had a thriving,
well-cared-for look.
‘Monks and nuns always have the best-kept gardens,’ said Grandmother Jia, in
smiling approval of what she saw. ‘They have nothing else to do with their time.’
They were walking towards the meditation hall on the east side of the courtyard. As
they seemed to hesitate in the outer foyer, Adamantina invited them to go on inside,
but Grand?mother Jia declined.
‘No, we won’t go inside just now. We’ve all recently taken wine and meat, and as
you’ve got the Bodhisattva in there, it would be sacrilege. We can sit out here, where
we are. Bring us some of your nice tea. We’ll just drink one cup and then go out
again.’
Adamantina hurried off to make tea.
Having heard a good deal about her, Bao-yu studied her very attentively, when she
arrived back presently with the tray. It was a little cinque-lobed lacquer tea-tray
decorated with a gold-infilled engraving of a cloud dragon coiled round the character
for ‘longevity’. On it stood a little covered tea?cup of Cheng Hua enamelled
porcelain. Holding the tray out respectfully in both her hands, she offered the cup to
Grand?mother Jia.
‘I don’t drink Lu-an tea,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘I know you don’t,’ said Adainantina with a smile. ‘This is Old Man’s Eyebrows.’
Grandmother Jia took the tea and inquired what sort of water it had been made
with.
‘Last year’s rain-water,’ said Adamantina.
After drinking half’ Grandmother Jia handed the cup to Grannie Liu.
‘Try it,’ she said. ‘See what you think of it.’
Grannie Liu gulped down the remaining half.
‘Hmn. All right. A bit on the weak side, though. It would be better if it were brewed
a little longer.’
Grandmother Jia and the rest seemed to derive much amuse?ment from these
comments.
The others were now served tea in covered cups of ‘sweet-white’ eggshell china—all,
that is, except Bao-chai and Dai-yu, whom Adamantina tugged by the sleeve as an
indication that they should follow her inside. Bao-yu stealthily slipped out after them
and saw Adamantina usher them into a side-room leading off the foyer. This was
Adamantina’s own room. Inside it Bao-chai seated herself on the couch and Dai-yu
sat on Adamantina’s meditation mat. Adamantina busied herself at the stove, fanning
the charcoal until the water was boiling vigorously and brewing them a fresh pot of
tea. Bao-yu stepped softly into the room and made his presence known to the two
cousins.
‘So you get the hostess’s special brew?’
‘Yes,’ they said laughing. ‘And it’s no good your gate-crashing in here after us,
because there’s none for you.’
Just as Adamantina was about to fetch cups for the girls, an old lay-sister appeared at
the door carrying the empties she had been collecting in the foyer.
‘Don’t bring that Cheng Hua cup in here,’ said Adamantina. ‘Leave it outside.’
Bao-yu understood immediately. It was because Grannie Liu had drunk from it. In
Adamantina’s eyes the cup was now contaminated. He watched her as she got cups
out for the girls. One of them, a cup with a handle, had
THE PUMPKIN CUP

carved in li-shu characters on one side and

             Wang Kai his Treasure

in little autograph characters. on the back, followed by another column of tiny
characters:

             Examined by Su Dong-po in the Inner Treasury
             Fourth month Yuan-feng era anno 50

When she had poured tea into this cup she handed it to Bao-chai.
The other cup was shaped like a miniature begging-bowl and was inscribed with the
words

THE HORN LINK GOBLET

in ‘pearl-drop’ seal script. Adamantina filled it and handed it to Dai-yu.
She poured tea for Bao-yu in the green jade mug that she normally drank from
herself, Bao-yu commented jokingly on the choice:
‘I thought you religious were supposed to treat all earthly creatures alike. How
comes it that the other two get priceless heirlooms to drink out of but I only get a
common old thing like this?’
‘I have no wish to boast,’ said Adamantina, ‘but this “com?mon old thing” as you
call it may well be more valuable than anything you could find in your own
household.’
‘In the world’s eyes, yes,’ said Bao-yu. ‘But “other coun?tries, other ways”, you
know. When I enter your domain, I naturally adopt your standards and look on gold,
jewels and jade as common, vulgar things.’
Adamantina glowed with pleasure. In place of the jade mug she hunted out a large
drinking-bowl for him to drink out of. It was carved from a gnarled and ancient
bamboo root in the likeness of a coiled-up dragon with horns like antlers.
‘There, that’s the only thing I’ve got left. Do you think you can drink so much?’
Delightedly he assured her that he could.
‘Yes, I dare say you could too,’ said Adamantina. ‘But I’m not sure that I’m prepared
to waste so much of my best tea on you. You know what they say “One cup for a
connoisseur, two for a rustic, and three for a thirsty mule”. What sort of creature
does that make you if you drink this bowlful?’
Bao-chai, Dai-yu and Bao-yu all three laughed at this. Adamantina poured the
equivalent of about a cupful into the bamboo-root bowl. Savouring it carefully in
little sips, Bao-yu found it of incomparable freshness and lightness and praised it
enthusiastically.
‘You realize, of course,’ said Adamantina seriously, ‘that it is only because of the
other two that you are drinking this. If you had come here alone, I should not have
given you any.
Bao-yu laughed.
‘I fully realize that, and I don’t feel in the least indebted to you. I shall offer my
thanks to them.’
Adamantina pondered this statement with unsmiling gravity.
‘Yes. I think that would be sensible.’
‘Is this tea made with last year’s rain-water too?’ Dai-yu asked her.
Adamantina looked scornful.
‘Oh! can you really not tell the difference? I am quite disap?pointed in you. This is
melted snow that I collected from the branches of winter-flowering plum-trees five
years ago, when I was living at the Coiled Incense temple on Mt Xuan-mu. I managed
to fill the whole of that demon-green glaze water-jar with it. For years I couldn’t bring
myself to start it; then this summer I opened it for the first time Today is only the
second time I have ever used any. I am mod surprised that you cannot tell the
difference. When did stored rain-water have such buoyant lightness? How could one
possibly use it for a tea like this?’
Dai-yu was too well aware of Adamantina’s eccentricity to attempt a reply; and since
it felt awkward to sit there saying nothing, she signalled to Bao-chai that they should
go. While the three of them were leaving, Bao-yu stopped to have a word with
Adamantina.
‘That cup that the old woman drank out of: of course, I realize that you can’t
possibly use it any more, but it seems a shame to throw it on one side. Couldn’t you
give it to the old woman? She’s very poor, and if she sold it, she could probably live
for quite a long while on the proceeds. What do you think?’
Adamantina reflected for some moments and then nodded.
Yes, I suppose so. Fortunately I have never drunk out of that cup myself. If I had, I
should have smashed it to pieces rather than give it to her. If you want her to have it,
though, you must give it to her yourself. I will have no part in it. And you must take it
away immediately.’
‘But of course,’ said Bao-yu. ‘No one would expect you to speak to her. That would
be an even greater pollution. Just give the cup to me and I shall see to the rest.’
Adamantina ordered the cup to be brought in and handed over to Bao-yu. As he took
it, Bao-yu said
‘After we’ve gone, shall I get my boys to bring a few buckets of water from the lake
and clean the floor for you ?’
Adamantina smiled graciously.
‘That would be very nice. But tell them to bring the water only as far as the gate.
They can leave it there at the foot of the outer wall. Tell them not to come inside.’
‘Of course,’ said Bao1u, putting the cup into his sleeve as they went into the foyer.
He found a junior maid of Grand?mother Jia’s there and entrusted it to her.
‘When Grannie Liu goes, see that she takes this Cup with her, will you?’
By the time he had done this, Grandmother Jia was already outside in the courtyard
expressing a desire to get back. Ada?mantina made no serious effort to detain her,
and after seeing her guests out of the Hermitage, went in again and closed the gate
after her.

*

Back at the scene of the party, Grandmother Jia, who was feeling somewhat
exhausted, told Lady Wang and the girls to act as hostesses to Aunt Xue while she
herself went off to Sweet-rice Village for a rest. Xi-feng ordered the servants to fetch
a little bamboo carrying-chair, which Grandmother Jia got into. Two old women lifted
it up, and then off they all went, Xi-feng and Li Wan one on either side of it and a
little cohort of maids and older servants bringing up the rear.
As soon as Grandmother Jia had gone, Aunt Xue excused herself and left, Lady Wang,
having dismissed the young actresses and given orders for the left-over food in the
lacquer boxes to be distributed among the maids, also availed herself of the
opportunity of taking a rest. Putting her feet up on the couch lately occupied by
Grandmother Jia, she first caused the blinds to be let down, then, instructing one of
the junior maids to massage her legs, and murmuring something about ‘calling her if
anyone came from Her Old Ladyship’, she settled her-self down for a nap.
Bao-yu and the girls watched the maids take the food-boxes out onto the rockery.
Some sat there on the rocks for their picnic; others spread out over the grass below
or sat under the trees or down at the water’s edge. Although so dispersed, they
managed to create a considerable hubbub.
After a little while Faithful arrived with instructions to show Grannie Liu some more
of the Garden. The cousins, hoping for more laughs, went along with them.
A short walk took them to the monumental stone arch at the entrance to the
Reunion Palace.
‘Goodness me!’ said the old woman. ‘You even have a temple here!’
She fell down on her knees and kotowed, causing her young companions to double
up with laughter.
‘Why do you laugh?’ she said. ‘Do you think I don’t know what the words say? We
have quite a few temples where I come from and they all have arches like this. The
writing on the arch is the name of the temple.’
‘All right. What’s the name of this temple then?’ they asked her.
Grannie Liu pointed upwards at the characters inscribed overhead.
‘“Temple of the Jade Emperor”. That’s what it says, doesn’t it?’
This produced an ecstasy of merriment in the young people. No doubt they would
have gone on teasing her, but just at that moment there was an alarming rumble
from her bowels and she clutched the hand of one of the little maidservants standing
by and begged her for the favour of a couple of sheets of paper, while with the other
hand she began undoing the buttons of her dress.
The others, still laughing, shouted at her to stop
‘No, no! Not here! Not here!’
They told one of the older women to escort her to a place beyond the north-east
corner of the precincts where there was a privy. Having led Grannie Liu to within
sight of it and pointed it out to her, the old servant deemed this an excellent
opportunity of taking some time off, and went away, leaving Grannie Liu to make her
way back alone.
Now Grannie Liu had drunk quantities of yellow rice-wine, which did not in fact agree
with her; on top of that she had eaten a lot of rich, fatty food; and as the food had
made her thirsty, she had concluded by drinking an excessive amount of tea. The
upset stomach which was the inevitable consequence of so much indulgence kept
her a wearisome long time in the privy before her business there was completed.
When she at last emerged, the colder air outside drove the wine fumes up into her
head, increasing the dizziness, which might be thought normal in a woman of her
years who has suddenly got up after squatting for a long time on her heels, to such
an extent that she was quite Unable to make out the route that she had come by.
Everywhere she looked there were buildings, rocks and trees. Unable to decide which
of them lay in the right direction, she made for the nearest paved path and, with slow
and deliberate steps, followed it to see where it would take her.
It took her in time to the courtyard wall of a house, but she could find no gate in it,
and after wandering round a long while looking for one, she came upon a bamboo
trellis, which she contemplated with some astonishment.
‘Hmn. Bean-sticks. What are they doing here?’
The ‘bean-sticks’ resolved themselves into a rose-covered pergola. After walking
alongside it for a while, she came to a round ‘moon-gate’, which she entered. Ahead
of her was a channel of crystal-clear water, five or six feet wide. Its banks were
reinforced with stone, and a large, flat slab of white stone had been laid across it to
make a bridge. After she had crossed the bridge there was a raised cobbled path
which, after a couple of right-angled bends, brought her up to the door of the house.
The first thing she saw on entering it was a young woman smiling at her in welcome.
Grannie Liu smiled back.
‘I’m lost, miss. The young ladies have left me to find my own way and I’ve
wandered in here by mistake.’
Surprised that the girl did not reply, Grannie Thu stepped forward to take her hand
and—bang!—hit her head a most painful thump on the wooden wall. The girl was a
painting, as she found on closer inspection.
‘Strange!’ she thought. ‘How can they paint a picture so that it sticks out like that?’
Grannie Liu was ignorant of the foreign mode of light-and-?shadow painting and was
sorely puzzled to discover, on touch?ing the picture, that it did not in fact ‘stick out’
but was flat all over. Turning from it with a sigh and a shake of her head, she moved
on to a little doorway in the wooden partition-wall, over which hung a green,
flower-patterned portière. She raised the portiere and went inside.
In the room she now entered everything, from the top of the surrounding walls,
delicately incised with shapes of swords, vases, musical instruments, incense-burners
and the like, to the lavish furnishing below, in which

                 The weaver’s glowing art combined
                 With gleam of gold and. orient pearl,

and thence down to the very floor of brilliantly patterned green glazed tiles beneath
her feet, was such as to make even more dazzled the eyes of an already intoxicated
old woman.
She looked for the way out - but where was it? To the left of her there was a
bookcase, to the right a screen. She tried behind the screen. Ah, yes! There was the
door. But there too, to her intense surprise, approaching her from the opposite
direction and causing her a momentary palpitation of the heart, was another old
woman, whom she took to be her old gossip from the village.
‘What? are you here too?’ she asked her, ‘I suppose you were wondering what had
become of me these last few days. Well, it was neighbourly to come and look for me.
Which of the young women brought you in?’
She noticed, with much amusement, that her old neigh?bour’s head was covered all
over with flowers.
‘Hoo! You’ll catch it! Picking the flowers from their garden to put in your own hair.
Well I never!’
The other merely grinned back at her and said nothing. Grannie Liu stretched out a
hand to give her the touch of shame. The other old woman stretched her hand out
too to stop her. After a. brief’ soundless skirmish, Grannie Liu managed to get her
finger onto the other one’s face. But no sooner had she done so than she recoiled in
horror, for the cheek she touched was as cold and hard as a block of ice. Suddenly
the truth dawned on her:
‘I’ve heard of rich folks having what they call “dressing mirrors ‘in their houses.
Mayhap I’m standing in front of one of them and it’s myself I’m looking at.’
She stretched out her hand again to feel and closely examined the surface. Yes, no
doubt of it: it was a mirror, let into the carved surface of the wooden partition. She
laughed at her own error.
‘Yes, but how do I get out of here?’ she thought, as she continued to finger the
mirror’s carved surround.
Suddenly there was a loud clunk! which so frightened the old woman that for some
moments she rolled her eyes in ter?ror. The mirror was in fact a kind of door. It had a
West Ocean mechanism by which it could be opened or closed, and Gran?nie Liu, in
feeling around it, had accidentally touched the spring which had made the mirror
slide back into the panel?ling, revealing the doorway underneath.
Pleasantly surprised, she passed through the doorway into a room whose main
feature was a rich and elegantly patterned bed. Now Grannie Liu was seven or eight
parts drunk and thoroughly worn out from all her walking. Seeing a bed in front of
her, she sat down on it gratefully, to rest her feet. But though she intended no more
than a few moments’ rest, as soon as she had sat down, her weariness overcame her.
Her head went down and her feet went up as though she was no longer in possession
of them; a darkness closed over her eyes, and she sank back on the bed, fast asleep.
Outside in the Garden meanwhile, the cousins were begin?ning to wonder what had
become of her, and Ban-er, missing his grandmother, became panicky and began to
cry.
‘Perhaps she’s fallen into the privy,’ one of the young people suggested cheerfully.
‘We’d better send someone to have a look.’
Two old women were sent to the privy to investigate. When they reported back ‘hat
she was not there, the others were at a loss to think where she could have got to. It
was Aroma who hit on the correct hypothesis.
‘She must have missed the way back because she was drunk. If she followed the
path in the wrong direction, it will have taken her to our back Courtyard. Now if she
went through the pergola and then on into the house through the back door, she’ll
probably have been seen by one of the maids. If she didn’t go in through the pergola
but went on walking in a south-westerly direction, Heaven only knows where she’ll
end up! I think I’d better go and have a look.
She hurried back to Green Delights, intending to ask the junior maids if they had seen
her; but the place was deserted; they had all sneaked off elsewhere to play. Entering
the main building by way of the front door, she made her way through the
complicated carved partition. A thunderous snoring could be heard coming from the
bedroom at the back. She hurried through. As she entered the bedroom, a heavy
stink, com?pounded of farts and wine-fumes, assailed her nostrils. Her eyes travelled
to the bed, from which the sounds were coming, and saw Grannie Liu, spreadeagled
on her back and fast asleep.
As soon as she had overcome her shock, she rushed up to the bed and shook her
relentlessly until she woke. Grannie Liu opened her eyes wide and saw Aroma
standing over her.
‘Oh, miss!’ She scrambled hurriedly to her feet. C Oh, I am sorry! Anyway—praise
be!— I haven’t dirtied the bed.’
She felt it nervously, to make sure.
Aroma, mortally afraid that someone would overhear and Bao-yu get to know of
what had happened, gestured to her violently not to speak. Hurriedly she threw
three or four whole handfuls of Hundred Blend aromatic onto the incense burner
that stood always smouldering beside the bed and re?placed its cover.
‘At least it’s a mercy she wasn’t sick,’ she thought to her?self.
Speaking to her in an urgent whisper, she nevertheless con?trived to smile at her
reassuringly:
‘It’s all right. I’ll look after this. Just follow me.’
Grannie Liu nodded gratefully and followed her to the junior maids’ quarters outside,
where Aroma made her sit down.
  ‘If they ask what happened, just say that you passed Out and had a little nap on
the rockery.’
Grannie Liu willingly agreed, and Aroma gave her some tea. By the end of the second
cup she had sobered up com?pletely and was able to converse.
‘Which of the young ladies does the bedroom belong to?’ she asked Aroma. ‘It’s the
most beautiful I ever saw. I thought I was in paradise.’
Aroma gave a wry little smile.
‘It’s—actually it’s Master Bao’s bedroom.’
Grannie Liu fell silent, horrified by the enormity of her trespass. Seeing that she had
now recovered, Aroma led her out through the front courtyard and back to where
the others were waiting.
‘I found her asleep on the grass,’ she said when she saw them, ‘so I’ve brought her
back for you.’
The others seemed satisfied with this explanation, for no further mention was made
of it.
Shortly after this Grandmother Jia woke up and dinner was laid for her in Sweet-rice
Village; but she felt too exhausted to eat anything, and getting into the bamboo
carrying-chair again, had herself carried back to her own apartment to rest. When
she was back, she told Xi-feng and the rest of the young folk who had escorted her to
go and have their dinner, and the cousins went back into the Garden
Ensuing events will be dealt with in the following Chapter.
CHAPTER 42

Lady Allspice wins over a suspicious nature with some
well-intentioned advice
And River Queen enhances her reputation as a wit with
some amusing sarcasms



The last chapter showed how Grandmother Jia, escorted by all the others, returned
from Sweet-rice Village to her own apartment. As soon as she arrived, she insisted
that the young people should go off and have their dinner. The young people
accordingly went back into the Garden, and when they had eaten, the party finally
broke up.
Returning from the Garden with little Ban-er, Grannie Liu first called on Xi-feng to
announce her intention of leaving for home early next morning.
‘We’ve only been here two or three days,’ she said, ‘but in these two or three days
we’ve seen and heard and eaten and drunk more things than we ever dreamed of.
I’m truly grateful to you and Her Old Ladyship and the young gentlewomen and the
young ladies working in the different apartments for treating an old countrywoman
with so much kindness. I don’t know what I can do in return. All I can think of is to
buy some sticks of best incense when I get back so that I can offer some every day to
the Lord Buddha and pray him to give you long life. Leastways it would show my
gratitude.’
‘It’s a bit early yet for rejoicing,’ said Xi-feng drily. ‘Thanks to you, Her Old Ladyship
seems to have caught a chill and is at this very moment lying on her back
complaining how bad she feels; and my little girl has caught a cold, too, and is lying in
there with a fever.’
Grannie Liu murmured sympathetically.
‘Her Old Ladyship’s feeling her age, poor soul,’ she said. And she isn’t used to the
exercise.’
‘I’ve never seen her more lively than she was today,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Generally when
she goes into the Garden, she’ll visit just one or two places, sit there for a little while,
and then come back again. But today, because you were there and she wanted to
show you everything, she must have covered the greater part of the Garden. It was
also because of you that I wasn’t on hand when Lady Wang gave my little girl that
piece of cake. I’m sure it was eating out in the cold that has made her feverish.’
‘I suppose your little lass doesn’t go into the Garden very much,’ said Grannie Liu.
‘Not like our young ones, off to play in the grave-garths almost as soon as they can
walk. She may have caught a cold from the wind as you say. On the other hand,
children of her age, being pure of body, often have the second sight. It could have
been brought on by seeing a spirit. If I was you, I’d have a look in the Almanac, just in
case. You never know, the child might have been pixified.’
Wondering why she had not thought of this herself, Xi-feng at once ordered Patience
to fetch down the Jade Casket. Sun?shine was summoned to look up the relevant
passage and read it out to them. This, after some preliminary hunting, he pro?ceeded
to do:

EIGHTH MONTH. TWENTY-FIFTH DAY: Sicknesses Occurring on this day have a
south-easterly origin. Possible causes Encounter with spirit of hanged person or
flower spirit. Recommended action Maxi?mum benefit may be obtained by procuring
voluntary departure of spirit. To do this, take forty pieces of coloured paper spirit
money’ and walk forty paces in a south-easterly direction offering one of the pieces
at every step.

    ‘There you are!’ said Xi-feng. ‘That must be it. The Garden is just where you’d
expect to run into a flower spirit. I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if that doesn’t account
for Her Old Lady?ship’s trouble as well.’
She sent someone forthwith to obtain two lots of spirit money and got two of the
servants to carry out the exorcism, one on Grandmother Jia’s behalf and the other on
behalf of her little girl. As soon as it was over, she and Grannie Liu went in to see how
Baby was getting on. They found her sleeping peacefully.
‘There!’ said Xi-feng delightedly. ‘It takes an old, ex?perienced person like yourself
to know these things. Perhaps you could also tell me why she’s such a sickly little girl.
She’s always going down with something or other.’
‘There’s nothing unusual about that,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘Children of well-to-do folks
are brought up so delicate, their bodies can’t stand any hardship. And for another
thing, when young folks are cherished too much, it overloads their luck. It might be
better for her if in future you tried not to make quite so much of her.’
‘You may be right,’ said Xi-feng without much conviction. ‘It’s just occurred to me:
as we haven’t named the child yet, I wonder if you’d like to name her for us? For one
thing, being named by someone so old will help her to live longer; and for another—I
hope you won t mind my saying this, but you country people do have quite a lot of
poverty and hardship to contend with—being named by a poor person like yourself
may help to balance her luck.’
Grannie Liu thought for a bit.
‘When was she born?’
‘Ah, that’s just the trouble,’ said Xi-feng. ‘She was born on Qiao-jie—the Seventh of
the Seventh—a very unlucky date.’
‘No matter,’ said Grannie Lin. ‘Call her “Qiao-jie” then. That’s what the doctors
mean when they talk about “fighting poison with poison and fire with fire”. You call
her “Qiao?-jie” like I say, and I guarantee that she’ll live to a ripe old age. I prophesy
for this child that when she’s a big girl and the others are all going off to get married,
she may for a time find that things are not going her way; but thanks to this name, all
her misfortunes will turn into blessings, and what at first looked like bad luck will turn
out to be good luck in the end.’
Xi-feng was of course delighted with these ‘auspicious words’ and thanked her
warmly.
‘May it turn out for her as you say!’
She summoned Patience.
‘We’re going to be busy tomorrow and may not have the time then. As you’ve got
nothing to do at the moment, why don’t you get the things for Grannie together, so
that every?thing will be ready for her to start first thing tomorrow?’
‘Please don’t go giving me a lot of things,’ said Grannie Liu. ‘I’ve already put you to
so much inconvenience these last few days, I should feel even more uncomfortable
carrying a lot of things back with me.’
‘These are only very ordinary things,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Noth?ing special. Just a few
things for you to take back with you and show off to the neighbours. Just so as to be
able to say that you’ve been to town.’
‘Come over here, Grannie, and have a look,’ said Patience. Grannie Lu followed her
into the next room. A full half of the kang was occupied by her piled-up presents.
Patience picked them up one by one and explained them to her.
‘This sky-blue material is the gauze you said you wanted. The pale-blue gauze in a
closer weave is a present from the Mistress to line it with. These are two lengths of
wild-silk pongee. You can use it to make either a dress or a skirt with; it would do
equally well for either. In this wrapping here there are two lengths of silk for making
up into a New Year outfit. This is a box of various kinds of cakes and pastries made in
the Imperial kitchens. There are some kinds that you’ve al?ready eaten and some
that you haven’t. You want to put them out on plates when you’re having someone
to tea: you’ll find they’re a bit better than the ones you can buy in the shops. These
two sacks are the ones you brought the vegetables in when you came. This one has
got two bushels of pink ‘Em?peror’ rice in it. It makes a really delicious congee. This
one has got fruit and nuts and other things from the Garden in it. And this packet
here has got eight taels of silver in it. Every?thing up to here is from the Mistress.
Now these two packets here have each got fifty taels of silver in them - a hundred
taels in all. They’re a present from Her Ladyship, for starting a little business or
buying some land with when you get back, so that you can be self-sufficient in future
and not have to keep falling back on your friends. The two jackets’—here Patience
smiled somewhat embarrassedly—‘the two jackets and the two skirts and the four
head-scarves and the packet of embroidery silks are a present from me. The clothes
have only been worn a very little but they aren’t new: so if you decide to throw them
back at me, I shan’t complain.’
Grannie Liu had been exclaiming rapturously as each item was shown to her and
must have uttered several dozen ‘Holy Names’ by the time Patience came to her own
gift.
‘Throw them back at you, Miss?’ she said warmly, touched by the maid’s kindness
and humility. ‘How can you say such a thing? Fine clothes like these? I shouldn’t
know where to buy them if I had the money! You make me feel ashamed. I don’t like
to take them off you; yet if I don’t, you will think me un?grateful.’
‘Get away with you!’ said Patience. ‘That sort of talk is for strangers, and you are
one of us. If I didn’t think of you so, I’d never have dared make the offer. You just take
them and stop worrying. In any case, there’s something I want from you in return.
Next New Year, bring us some of your home-dried mixed vegetables: pigweed and
cowpeas and kidney beans and dried aubergines and dried gourd-shavings. Everyone
here loves them. You just bring us some of them. We don’t want anything else from
you, mind, so don’t go wondering what else to bring. Just bring some of them, and
we’ll be quits.’
Grannie Liu thanked her warmly and promised to remem?ber the dried vegetables.
‘Now off to bed with you!’ said Patience. ‘I’ll look after this lot for you. You can
leave it here tonight, and tomorrow we’ll send the boys out for a cab and get them to
load it for you. So you’ve got nothing to worry about.’
Overwhelmed by so much kindness, Grannie Liu went back into the other room to
take her leave of Xi-feng, and after thanking her many times over, went off to
Grandmother Jia’s apartment to spend the night.
She was up betimes next morning and would like to have said good-bye to
Grandmother Jia as soon as she had com?pleted her toilet, and made an early start;
but the family fore?stalled her. Knowing that the old lady was indisposed, they had
trooped in first thing to inquire how she was and had already sent outside for a
doctor. The latter’s arrival at the mansion was shortly after announced by an old
woman? servant, whereupon the old women in attendance on Grand mother Jia
urged her to conceal herself behind the curtains of the summer-bed. But
Grandmother Jia refused to budge.
‘I’m old, too, woman—old enough to be his mother, I shouldn’t wonder. What have
I got to fear from him at my age? I’m not going behind any curtains. Let him examine
me where I am.’
Seeing that she was resolved to stay, the old women brought up a little table and put
a small pillow on it for her to rest her arm on. These preparations completed, they
gave orders for the doctor to be admitted.
Dr Wang was shortly to be observed crossing the courtyard below, conducted by
Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian and Jia Rong. Modestly declining to walk up the central ramp,
he followed Cousin Zhen up the right-hand side steps onto the terrace, where two
old women, one on either side of the doorway, were holding up the door-blind in
readiness. Bao-yu came for?ward to welcome the doctor as the two old women were
conducting him through the outer room, and led him, still accompanied by the other
gentlemen, to his grandmother inside.
The old lady was sitting up very stiffly on a couch. She was wearing a black crepe
jacket lined with pearly-haired baby lamb’s skin. Four little maids, their hair still done
up in childish ‘horns’, stood two on either side of her, holding fly whisks and
spittoons, and five or six old serving-women were fanned out in a sort of bodyguard
behind her. Vaguely dis?cernible glimpses of brightly-coloured dresses and golden
hair-ornaments betrayed the presence of numerous younger women behind the
green muslin curtains at the back. Not daring to raise his head in so much female
company, Dr Wang advanced and saluted his patient. Observing that he was dressed
in the uniform of a mandarin of the sixth rank, Grand?mother Jia deduced that he
must be a Court Physician, and in returning his salutation was careful to address him
with the ‘Worshipful’ to which his appointment entitled him.
‘And what is the Worshipful’s name?’ she asked Cousin Zhen.
‘Wang.’
‘When I was a young woman, the President of the Imperial College of Physicians
was a Wang,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Wang Jun-xiao. Famous for his diagnoses.’
The doctor bowed.
‘He was my great-uncle,’ he said, smiling demurely, but still not daring to raise his
head.
Grandmother Jia laughed.
‘That makes you a friend of the family.’
She stretched out an arm and slowly arranged it for him on the pillow. The old
women brought up a large stool which they set down in front of her table and slightly
to one side. Dr Wang knelt on it, squatting on his heel with one haunch so that he
was half-sitting on the edge of the stool, and in that polite but uncomfortable
posture proceeded at great length to take the old lady’s pulses, first in one arm and
then in the other. After that he made another bow and retired, eyes still on the floor,
as they had been throughout the consultation.
‘Thank you,’ said Grandmother Jia as he was leaving. ‘See him out, will you, Zhen?
And see that he gets. some tea.’
Murmuring a reply, Cousin Zhen himself withdrew, fol?lowed by Jia Lian and Jia Rong,
and conducted Dr Wang back to one of the gentlemen’s rooms in the front part of
the mansion.
‘There’s nothing seriously wrong with Lady Jia,’ said Dr Wang when they were
seated. ‘She has a slight chill. There is no need for her to take any medicine. A light,
simple diet for a day or two and see that she keeps warm. That should be enough. I’ll
write Out a prescription that you can have made up if she feels like taking something.
If not, I should just for?get about it.’
He drank his tea and wrote out the prescription. Just as he was about to leave, the
nurse came hurrying in with Xi-feng’s little girl in her arms.
‘Doctor, have a look at us too, will you?’
The doctor went over, took one of the child’s hands and supported it on his own left
hand while he felt her pulse. Then he felt her forehead and inspected her tongue.
‘I’m afraid the young lady is not going to be very pleased with my advice,’ he said
with a smile. ‘A good, cleansing hunger is what she needs. Let her miss a couple of
meals. No need for a prescription. I shall send you some pills that you can dissolve in
hot ginger-water and give her to drink at bed?time. That should help do the trick.’
With that he took his leave once more and departed.
Cousin Zhen and the other two went back to Grandmother Jia’s apartment with the
prescription and reported what the doctor had said. Then they laid the prescription
on the table and withdrew.
Lady Wang, Li Wan, Xi-feng, Bao-chai and the rest came out from behind the curtain
as soon as the doctor had gone. Lady. Wang sat with Grandmother Jia for a while
before re?turning to her own apartment.
The coast was now at last clear for Grannie Liu to come forward and take her leave.
‘You must come again when you have the time,’ said Grand?mother Jia. She
ordered Faithful to see her off. ‘I can’t see you off myself,’ she said. ‘I’m not feeling
too well today.’
Grannie Liu, having thanked her and said good-bye, fol?lowed Faithful out of the
room and into a room at the side of the courtyard. Faithful pointed to a large bundle
on the kang.
‘These are dresses given to Her Old Ladyship by various people over the years as
birthday or festival presents, but as she refuses to wear any clothes made by
outsiders, they’ve none of them ever been worn. It’s a shame to keep them, really.
She told me yesterday to pick out a few for you to take back with you, either to give
away as presents or to wear yourself about the house. In this box here you’ll find
those pastries you wanted. This parcel has got the medicines in you were talking
about the other day: the Red Flower Poison Dis?pellers, the Old Gold Anti-Fever
Pastilles, the Blood Renewing Elixir Pills and the Easy Birth Pills. You’ll find each kind
wrapped up separately inside its own prescription. These two little silk purses are to
wear.’ Faithful undid the draw-strings and extracted from each purse a golden
‘Heart’s Desire’ medallion with a device showing an ingot, a writing-brush and a
sceptre. She smiled at Grannie Liu mischievously:
‘You give me these and keep the purses.’
Grannie Liu, surprised and delighted (as she showed by her many pious ejaculations)
to be receiving these further presents in addition to what Patience had shown her
the night before, seemed eager to accede to this request.
‘Yes, yes, Miss. You keep them by all means.’
Faithful, who had not intended to be taken seriously, re?placed the medallions in
their. purses and did them up again.
‘I was only pulling your leg. I’ve got lots of these things already. Keep them to give
the children at New Year.
While she was speaking, a little maid came in carrying a Cheng Hua enamelled
porcelain cup, which she handed to Grannie Liu.
‘Master Bao said I was to give you this.’
‘Well!’ said Grannie Liu as she took the cup from her. ‘Now what do you make of
that? Reckon it must be some?thing I did for him in a past life.’
‘Those clothes I gave you to change into the other day when you had your bath
were mine,’ said Faithful. ‘If you don’t mind taking them off me, I’ve got some more
like them that I’d like to make you a present of.’
As Grannie Liu made no objection, Faithful got out several more sets of clothing and
wrapped them up for her.
Grannie Lin wanted to go into the Garden to thank Bao-yu and the girls and say
good-bye to them; she also wanted to take her leave of Lady Wang; but Faithful
prevented her.
‘It isn’t necessary. In any case, they won’t be seeing anyone at this hour. I can thank
them for you when I see them later. Well, good-bye then. Come again when you can.’
She ordered an old servant-woman to fetch two pages from the inner gate to help
Grannie Liu out with her things. The old servant undertook to do this and also went
with Grannie Liu to collect the things from Xi-feng’s apartment. When they had got
them all together, she fetched the boys from the out?side corner gate who carried
them out to the street for her and loaded them into a waiting cab. Grannie Liu and
Ban-er then got in themselves and Set off without more ado on their journey back
home.
At this point they pass also out of our narrative, which turns now to other matters.
*

After they had eaten their lunch, Bao-chai and the test of the young people called
once more on Grandmother Jia, to see how she was progressing. On their way back,
as they reached that point in the Garden where their paths separated, Bao-chai
called Dai-yu over to her.
‘Frowner, come with me. There’s something I want to talk to you about.’
Dai-yu followed her to Allspice Court. When they were in?side her room, Bao-chai sat
down.
‘Well?’ she said to Dai-yu. ‘Aren’t you going to kneel down? I am about to
interrogate you.’
Dai-yu was mystified.
‘Poor Bao-chai!’ she said, laughing. ‘The girl’s gone off her head. Interrogate me
about what ?’
‘My dear, well-bred young lady!’ said Bao-chai. ‘My dear, sheltered young innocent!
What were those things I heard you saying yesterday? Come now, the truth!’
Dai-yu, still mystified, continued to laugh. She was begin?ning to feel somewhat
uneasy, though she would not admit it.
‘What awful thing am I supposed to have said? I expect you’re making it up, but
you may as well tell me.’
‘Still acting the innocent?’ said Bao-chai. ‘What were those things you said
yesterday when we were laying that drinking game? I couldn’t think where you could
have got them from.’
Dai-yu cast her mind back and remembered, blushing, that the day before, when
stumped for an answer, she had got through her turn by citing passages from The
Return of the Soul and The Western Chamber. She hugged Bao-chai imploringly.
‘Dear coz! I really don’t know. I just said them without thinking. If you tell me not to,
I promise not to say them again.’
‘I really don’t know either,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I just thought they sounded rather
interesting. I thought perhaps you might be able to tell me what they were.’
‘Dear coz! Please don’t tell anyone about this. I promise not to repeat such things
again.’
Moved by the scarlet, shame-filled face and pitifully entreating voice, Bao-chai
relented and did not pursue her questioning. Having first drawn her down into a seat
and handed her some tea, she began, very gently, to address her in the following
manner:
‘What do you take me for? I’m just as bad. At seven or eight I used to be a real little
terror. Ours was reckoned to be rather a literary family. My grandfather was a
bibliophile, so the house we lived in was full of books. We were a big family in those
days. All my boy cousins and girl cousins on my father’s side lived with us in the same
house. All of us younger people hated serious books but liked reading poetry and
plays. The boys had got lots and lots of plays: The Western Chamber, The Lute-player,
A Hundred Yuan Plays—just about everything you could think of. They used to read
them behind our backs, and we girls used to read them behind theirs. Eventually the
grown-ups got to know about it and then there were beatings and lectures and
burning of books—and that was the end of that.
‘So, you see, in the case of us girls it would probably be better for us if we never
learned to read in the first place. Even boys, if they gain no understanding from their
reading, would do better not to read at all; and if that is true of boys, it certainly
holds good for girls like you and me. The little poetry-writing and calligraphy we
indulge in is not really our proper business. Come to that, it isn’t a boy’s proper
business either. A boy’s proper business is to read books in order to gain an
understanding of things, so that when he grows up he can play his part in governing
the country.
‘Not that one hears of that happening much nowadays. Nowadays their reading
seems to make them even worse than they were to start with. And unfortunately it
isn’t merely a case of their being led astray by what they read. The books, too, are
spoiled, by the false interpretations they put upon them. They would do better to
leave books alone and take up business or agriculture. At least they wouldn’t do so
much damage.
‘As for girls like you and me: spinning and sewing are our proper business. What do
we need to be able to read for? But since we can read, let us confine ourselves to
good, im?proving books; let us avoid like the plague those pernicious works of fiction,
which so undermine the character that in the end it is past reclaiming.’
This lengthy homily had so chastened Dai-yu that she sat with head bowed low over
her teacup and, though her heart consented, could only manage a weak little ‘yes’ by
way of reply.
At that moment Candida came into the room:
‘Mrs Zhu says will you please come over to discuss an important matter with her?
Miss Ying and Miss Tan and Miss Xi and Miss Shi and Master Bao are there already,
waiting for you.’
‘I wonder what it is this time,’ said Bao-chai.
‘We shall soon find out if we go,’ said Dai-yu.
So off she went, and Bao-chai with her, to Sweet-rice Vil?lage. They found everyone
else there, as Candida had said. Li Wan greeted them with a smile.
‘We’ve only just got our poetry club started, and already someone is trying to
wriggle out of it. It’s Xi-chun. She’s ask?ing for a year’s leave of absence.’
‘I can guess why that is,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It’s because of what Grandmother said about
painting the Garden. She’s decided to use that as an excuse.’
‘I don’t think you should blame Grandmother,’ said Tan-?chun. ‘It’s what Grannie
Liu said that started it.’
‘Grannie Liu, yes, that’s right,’ Dai-yu hurriedly corrected herself. ‘Whose ‘grannie’
is she anyway, I’d like to know? ‘Old Mother Locust’ we ought to call her, not ‘Grannie
Liu’.’
This set them all laughing.
‘If one wants to hear the demotic at its most forceful,’ said Bao-chai, ‘one has to
listen to Cousin Feng. Fortunately for us she can’t read, so her jokes are somewhat
lacking in finesse and the language she uses can never rise above the level at which it
is commonly spoken. The secret of Frowner’s sar?castic tongue is that she uses the
method adopted by Confu?cius when he edited the Spring and Autumn Anna/s, that
is to say, she extracts the essentials from vulgar speech and polishes and refines
them, so that when she uses them to illustrate a point, each word or phrase is given
its maximum possible effectiveness. The mere name ‘Old Mother Locust,’, for
example, is sufficient to evoke the whole scene of yesterday’s party and everything
that happened at it. What’s more, she is able to do this sort of thing almost without
thinking.’
The others, still laughing, assured Bao-chai that she excelled as a commentator no
less than Dai-yu and Xi-feng, in their different ways, as wits.
‘The reason I asked you all here is because I wanted your advice on how long we
ought to give her,’ said Li Wan. ‘I said a month, but she says that’s much too short.
What do you all think?
‘Logically a year wouldn’t be at all too long,’ said Dai-yu. ‘If it took a whole year to
build the Garden, she would natural?ly require about two years in which to paint it.
First she’s got to grind her ink, then she’s got to soften her brushes, then she’s got to
fix the paper, then she’s got to find her colours, and then -,
The others realized that this was a joke at Xi-chun’s expense.
‘Yes?’ they said, playing up to her. ‘What then?’
Dai-yu, unable to maintain a straight face, was beginning to giggle.
‘—and then proceed in like manner, by gradual degrees, to paint it.’
Prolonged hilarity and clapping of hands.
‘In like manner, by gradual degrees’,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I like that. The telling phrase at
the end. The trouble with all those jokes we were laughing at yesterday is that they
were funny enough at the time, but on recollection they seem rather stupid. Dai-yu’s
jokes on the other hand, though the words at first appear colourless, are richly
humorous to remember. They certainly make me laugh a lot.’
‘You shouldn’t flatter her, Cousin Chai,’ said Xi-chun plaintively. ‘It encourages her
to show off. It’s because you complimented her on her joke about Grannie Liu that
she’s started making fun of me.’
‘Tell me now,’ said Dai-yu, taking Xi-chun’s hand in her own, ‘is it to be a picture of
the Garden alone, or are we to be in it as well?’
‘It was originally to have been of the Garden alone,’ said Xi-chun, ‘but afterwards
Grandmother said that that would make it look too much like an architect’s drawing
and told me to put in some people. She said what we wanted was something like one
of those paintings of ‘Scholars Enjoying Themselves in a Landscape’. The trouble is, I
don’t know how to do buildings in the Elaborate style, and I’m no good at human
figures; but as I was too scared to refuse, I’ve got myself into a mess.’
‘Human figures are no problem,’ said Dai-yu. ‘It’s the insect-painting that’s going to
give you the trouble.’
‘Now you’re talking nonsense,’ said Li Wan. ‘What need will there be of insects in a
painting of the Garden? A few animals and birds dotted here and there maybe, but
no insects, surely?’
‘If she has no other insects in it, she’s got to have Old Mother Locust,’ said Dai-yu.
‘Without her the painting would be incomplete.’
The others all laughed. Dai-yu continued, laughing so much herself that she had to
clutch her chest with both hands:
‘You must hurry up and get on with the painting. I’ve al?ready thought of a title to
inscribe on it when it’s finished. You must call it ‘With Locust to the Chew’.’
The others threw back their heads and roared. Their laughter ended abruptly,
however, when a loud crash caused them to look anxiously around them to see what
had fallen.
It turned out to have been Xiang-yun’s chair. It had been a somewhat rickety one to
start with, and in laughing she had thrown herself back against it so violently that the
two joints connecting the chairback with the seat had sprung, causing her to sink
backwards and sideways, still sitting in the disin?tegrating chair. Fortunately she was
saved by the room’s wooden partition from falling onto the floor. The undignified
spectacle of her descent provoked fresh shouts of mirth which only gradually
subsided when Bao-yu hurried over and helped her to her feet.
As he passed Dai-yu he signalled to her with his eyes. Understanding that something
must be wrong with her appearance, she slipped into Li Wan’s bedroom and took the
cover off the mirror to have a look. It was the hair above her brows that was coming
loose. She pulled out the drawer in Li Wan’s dressing-box, took out two little
vanity-brushes, primmed her hair at the mirror, then, hurriedly replacing everything,
went back into the outer room, where the others were still laughing. She pointed a
finger accusingly at Li Wan.
‘So this is your idea of ‘supervision in needlework and moral instruction’—inviting
us over here for jokes and horse?play!’
‘Did you hear that, all of you?’ said Li Wan. ‘This is the ringleader who sets
everyone else laughing and misbehaving, yet she has the effrontery to blame me for
starting it all! Oh, I could - ! Well, all I can say is that I hope when you marry you have
a real Tartar for a mother-in-law and lots of nasty sisters-in-law with tongues as sharp
as yours. It will serve you right!’
Dai-yu, blushing, clung to Bao-chai’s hand.
‘Let’s give her a year’s leave, shall we?’
‘Let me suggest what I think is a fair compromise and see what the rest of you think
of it,’ said Bao-chai. ‘It’s true that Lotus Dweller can paint, but ‘painting’ in her case
means no more than an occasional sketch in the Impressionistic style. Now of course,
you couldn’t paint this Garden in the first place if you didn’t have impressions of it;
but the trouble is that the Garden itself was designed rather like a painting, with
every rock, every tree, every building in it carefully and pre?cisely placed in order to
produce a particular scenic effect; and if you tried to get your impressions of all of
these different scenes onto paper exactly as they are, they simply wouldn’t make a
picture. The shape of the paper imposes its own per?spectives. You have to make
them into a composition. You have to decide which to bring into the foreground and
which to push into the background, which to leave out altogether and which to show
only in glimpses. When you’ve done that, you can make your rough draft. And even
then, it’s only when you’ve studied the draft for a long time and corrected it until
you’re satisfied that you can go ahead with your transfer.
‘One of your difficulties is going to be the ruler-work. With all those buildings
you’re going to have to do the straight lines with a ruler, and in ruler-work if you’re
not very careful it’s easy to make the most terrible mistakes - railings that slant to
one side, leaning pillars, windows on the skew or steps drawn Out of line. Sometimes
careless ruling can produce even more grotesque results, like a table squashed into a
wall or a flower?pot apparently testing on the side of a curtain. Any one of these
things is enough to make a painting look ridiculous.
‘Putting in the human figures is going to be another prob?lem. First of all you have
to be very careful that you have got them in the right perspective. Then again, in
painting figures the clothes and the position of the hands and feet are of great
importance. A careless slip of the brush can mean a mon?strously swollen hand or a
crippled leg. Compared with these, little mishaps like the colour of the face running
into the hair are of minor importance.
‘In my opinion this painting is going to be very, very diffi?cult. And since a year is
thought to be too long and a month too short, the compromise I suggest is that she
should be allowed half a year to do it in, but that Cousin Bao should be appointed to
help her. My reason is not that I think he knows mote about painting than she does
and can tell her how to do it—I am sure that if he tried, it would only make matters
worse—but because whenever there is anything she doesn’t know about or has
difficulty in putting in, he will be able to take the painting to one or another of his
men friends outside who know about these matters and ask for their advice.’
Bao-yu was enthusiastic.
‘That’s a splendid idea. Zhan Guang can do Elaborate style buildings and Cheng
Ri-xing is very good at women. I’ll go and have a word with them now.’
‘Didn’t I tell you you ought to be called ‘Busybody’?’ said Bao-chai. ‘Just because
I’ve mentioned the possibility, you don’t have to go rushing off straight away. Wait
until we’ve finished discussing what needs to be done, then you can go and see them.
The question now is, what is she going to do this painting on?’
‘We’ve got some. Snow Wave paper still,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It comes in large enough
pieces and it holds the ink well.’
‘Oh, you’re just hopeless I’ said Bao-chai. ‘Snow Wave is a good, ink-receptive
paper for doing calligraphy or Impres?sionist style paintings on, and it will stand up to
the wrinkle-and-wipe work in a Southern School landscape; but it is quite unsuitable
for a painting like this one involving detailed colouring and layer upon layer of graded
washes. You’d merely ruin the picture and waste the paper.
‘Now I’ll tell you what to do. Before they started on the construction of this Garden,
they made a very detailed draw?ing of the layout. It was only an artist’s impression,
but the measurements shown on it were all accurate. Why don’t you ask Lady Wang
for that drawing and then ask Cousin Feng to give you a piece of heavyweight pongee
of the same dimen?sions? Cousin Bao can get Uncle Zheng’s gentlemen to size it for
you, and they can make you a draft by adapting the archi?tect’s drawing and putting
in the human figures. He could even get them to touch in some of the
blue-and-green background for you and indicate where the outlines will need
reinforcing with milk gold or milk silver.
‘Meanwhile you must get hold of a portable stove that you can use for melting and
extracting your glue on and for heat?ing the water to wash your brushes with. You’ll
also need a long distemperer’s table, and a blanket to cover it, for resting your
painting on. And I don’t suppose your present supply of paint-saucers and brushes is
likely to be adequate. You’d better start from scratch and get yourself a completely
new outfit.’
‘I haven’t got any equipment to speak of,’ said Xi-chun. ‘I just use my ordinary
writing-brushes when I want to paint. As for colours: red ochre, Canton indigo,
gamboge and safflower red are the only four I’ve got. Apart from that, all I have is a
couple of colouring brushes.’
‘Why ever didn’t you tell me before?’ said Bao-chai. ‘I’ve still got lots of these
things. The only thing is, if I give them to you before you actually need them, they
will only be lying around doing nothing in your room the same as they now are in
mine. On second thoughts I think I’ll hang on to them for the time being. We can say
that I am keeping them for you. But I can let you have any of them you want as soon
as the need arises. I’d rather you used my stuff for painting fans with and that sort of
thing, though. It would be a waste to use it on this great big painting of the Garden.
What I’ll do for you now is to make out a list of materials you can ask Lady Jia for. You
may not know about some of these things, so perhaps it would be a good idea if
Cousin Bao were to take them down at my dictation.’
Bao-yu had brush and ink already prepared. He had been intending in any case to
take notes, in order to have his own record of what she said, and had merely to pick
up his brush and wait for her to begin.
Here is the list she dictated:

large size raft brushes              4
No.2 size raft brushes          4
No.3 size raft brushes          4
large wash layers               4
medium wash layer                    4
small wash layers                    4
large Southern crab’s claws         10
small Southern crab’s claws         10
whisker brushes                     10
large colouring brushes             20
small colouring brushes             20
face liners                           10
willow-slip brushes                 20
arrow-shaped cinnabar               4 oz.
Southern red ochre                  4 oz.
orpiment                               4 oz.
azurite                         4 oz.
malachite                             4 oz.
brush-stick gamboge                 4 oz.
     Canton indigo                        8 oz.
    oyster-shell white                   4 boxes
    safflower red                        10 sheets
    red powder-gold                 200 leaves
gold foil                        200 leaves
    quality Canton glue                  4 oz.
    clear alum                           4 oz.


‘That doesn’t allow for the alum and glue that will be needed for the sizing,’ said
Bao-chai. ‘You can leave that to the menfolk.
By the time these colours have been washed and ground and emulsified and graded,
you should have enough there to last you a lifetime—messing about and
practice-work in?cluded.’
She continued with her list:



superfine silk strainers         4
coarse silk strainers            2
strainer-brushes            4
mortars, various sizes      4
coarse howls                     20
5-in. saucers               10
3 in. porcelain ditto            20
portable stoves             2
casseroles, various sizes        4
new porcelain water-jars    2
new water-buckets           2
1-ft white linen bags    4
light charcoal             20 catties
willow-wood charcoal        1 catty
3-drawer chest of drawers   1
gauze, close-woven          1 ell
raw ginger                  2 oz.
soy sauce                   1/2 catty


‘—a cooking-pot and a frying-slice,’ Dai-yu added hurriedly.
‘What are they for?’ said Bao-chai.
‘To use with the ginger and soy sauce,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Then she’ll be able to cook the
colours and eat them.’
The others laughed, including Bao-chai herself.
‘Frowner! Frowner!’ she said. ‘What do you know about it? If you didn’t first
season the new saucers by rubbing ginger-juice and sauce on the bottom and
burning them in, they would crack when you put them on the heat.’
The others assured Dai-yu that this was so. Dai-yu, mean?while, was reading through
the list.
‘Just look!’ she said, laying a hand on Tan-chun’s arm and speaking to her in an
undertone. ‘All those water-jars and chests of drawers and things to paint a picture! I
think she must have got confused at this point and started making a list for her
trousseau.’
This set Tan-chun off into a fit of the giggles. ‘Pinch her lips, Chai!’ she said. ‘You
should hear what she’s been saying about you.’
‘I don’t need to,’ said Bao-chai. ‘One doesn’t expect ivory from a dog’s mouth!’
Bearing down on Dai-yu as she said this, she forced her back, laughing and protesting,
upon the kang and made as if she would pinch her face.
‘Oh, please coz, forgive me!’ Dai-yu pleaded. ‘Little Frowner is younger than you
and doesn’t know any better. You should teach me how to be good. If you won’t be
nice to me, who else can I turn to?’
The others, not knowing what lay behind these words, were greatly amused.
‘Do forgive her!’ they said, laughing. ‘How pitifully she pleads! Even we are melted.’
But Bao-chai knew she was referring to their recent confrontation on the subject of
forbidden books, and feeling rather embarrassed to have this dragged up in the midst
of a playful tussle, hurriedly released her. Dai-yu rose to her feet laughing.
‘That’s my good coz. If it had been me, I should never have let you off!’
Bao-chai pointed her finger at Dai-yu and smiled at her in?dulgently.
‘I’m not surprised that Lady Jia is so fond of you or that the others find you so
amusing. I can’t help being fond of you too, little coz. Come here and let me do your
hair for you.’
Dai-yu turned her head obediently while Bao-chai re?fastened her back hair. Bao-yu,
watching from where he sat, thought how much better it looked for Bao-chai’s
attention, and wished that he had not told Dai-yu earlier to tidy the hair above her
brows, for then Bao-chai could have done that for her too. His agreeable musings on
the subject were interrupted by Bao-chai’s voice:
‘Have you finished writing the list? Perhaps you’d better be the one to see Lady Jia
about it. If they’ve got those things here already, so much the better. If not, you’ll
have to get some money to buy them with. In that case I might be able to advise you
on where to go for them.’
Bao-yu folded up the list and stowed it away inside his jacket. They continued to sit a
while longer, chatting about this and that.
After dinner they went to call on Grandmother Jia to see how she was. She had been
suffering from nothing more serious than a slight chill aggravated by fatigue, and by
the evening, after a day’s cosseting and two doses of the mild sudorific prescribed by
Dr Wang, she was almost better.
If you want to know what the next day held in store, you will have to read the
following chapter.

CHAPTER 43

An old woman’s whim is the occasion of a birthday collection
And a young man’s remorse finds solace in a simple ceremony



Our story recommences in Lady Wang’s apartment next day. On the previous
evening’s visit she had found Grandmother Jia almost completely recovered after
only two doses of the medicine prescribed for her that same morning by the doctor.
Satisfied that it was only a mild chill, contracted during her day in Prospect Garden,
and not anything more serious that the old lady had been suffering from, and
deeming it unneces?sary to make an early call again this morning, Lady Wang
summoned Wang Xi-feng to her own apartment to discuss the getting together of
some things to send to her husband, Jia Zheng. A summons from Grandmother Jia
arrived neverthe?less, and Lady Wang hurried over, taking Xi-feng with her, to see
what was the matter.
‘Are you still feeling better today, Mother?’ she asked her when they arrived.
‘I’m quite recovered now, thank you,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’ve had a sip or two of
the pheasant stew you sent me. It was very tasty I ate some of the meat in it and
enjoyed it very much.’
You have Feng to thank for that,’ said Lady Wang with a smile. ‘See how dutiful she is
to you! It shows that your kind?ness is not wasted on her.’
Grandmother Jia returned the smile and nodded affably.
‘It was good of her to think of me. If there’s any of the meat still left, I’d rather like a
few pieces of it fried. It has a pleasant, salty tang that goes well with the rice-gruel I
am taking The stew is very nice, but stew and gruel don’t go very well to?gether.’
Xi-feng at once sent orders to the main kitchen to have the pheasant-meat prepared.
‘Well, it wasn’t really my diet that I wanted to talk about,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘The reason I’ve sent for you is because the second of the ninth month is Feng’s
birthday. In previous years, though I’ve always meant to do something about it,
something or other has always cropped up which has pre?vented me from
celebrating it properly. As we’re all of us here together this year and it doesn’t look as
if there are likely to be any distractions, I propose that we should get together and
make a day of it.’
‘I was thinking just the same thing,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Since you feel in such good
spirits, Mother, why not settle now what we should do?
‘Well now, this is what I have been thinking,’ said Grand?mother Jia. ‘In other years,
no matter whose birthday it’s been, we’ve each of us given our individual presents.
Now that’s so dull, and what’s more, I think it’s a rather unsociable way of
celebrating a birthday. I’ve thought of a new way which will be much more sociable
and also lots of fun.’
‘Whatever it is, I’m sure that’s what we ought to do,’ said Lady Wang.
‘I think we ought to imitate what they do in poorer fami?lies,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘Everyone subscribes something towards a common pool, then, when it’s all been
collected, you spend it all on some treat or other, depending on how much you have.
What do you think of the idea?’
‘It sounds a very good one,’ said Lady Wang. ‘But how do we go about collecting
the subscriptions ?’
At this Grandmother Jia became still more animated. Let Aunt Xue and Lady Xing be
invited without delay, she told them. Let Bao-yu and the girls be sent for. And You-shi
from the other mansion. And why not Lai Da’s wife and some of the more respected
older members of the female staff? In?fected by her enthusiasm, the maids and older
women-servants went scurrying off in all directions to summon or invite.
In less time than it would take to eat a meal, all those invited, young and old,
mistress and servant, had been assembled, and the room was packed. Aunt Xue and
Grandmother Jia sat on their own facing the multitude, Lady Xing and Lady Wang on
chairs at the opposite side of the room beside the door. Bao-chai, Dai-yu, Xiang-yun
and the Three Springs sat in a row at the back of the kang behind Grandmother Jia
and Aunt Xue. Bao-yu half reclined in his grandmother’s lap. All the rest stood,
shoulder to shoulder, on the floor below.
As soon as she saw that they were all assembled, Grand?mother Jia gave orders for
stools to be brought so that Lai Da’s mother and various other of the more aged and
respected servants present might sit down. It was customary in the Jia household to
treat the older generation of servants those who had served the parents of the
present masters—with even greater respect than the younger generation of masters,
so that in this instance it was not thought at all surprising that You-shi, Xi-feng and Li
Wan should remain standing while old Mrs Lai and three or four other old nannies
(though not without first apologizing for the liberty) seated themselves on the stools.
Grandmother Jia now smilingly announced the proposal that she had already
outlined to Lady Wang. All present, it need hardly be said, were willing to fall in with
it—some because they were on good terms with Xi-feng and were genuinely happy
to give her pleasure, some because they were afraid of her and welcomed this as an
opportunity of getting themselves into her good books, and all because in any case
they could afford to do so. Accordingly, as soon as Grandmother Jia had finished
speaking, they all enthusiastically and with one voice agreed.
Grandmother Jia opened the list with her own subscription:
‘I’ll give twenty taels.’
‘I’ll follow Lady Jia,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Twenty taels.’
Lady Xing and Lady Wang called next:
‘We obviously can’t put ourselves on a level with Lady Jia. Sixteen taels.’
You-shi and Li Wan, decreasing their call by a like amount, came next:
‘Twelve taels.’
‘We can’t have you paying out that sort of money,’ Grand?mother Jia said to Li Wan,
‘—a young widow with no mean of her own. I’ll pay yours for you.’
‘Now don’t get carried away, Grandma! ‘said xi-feng. ‘You ought to do your sums
first before you start interfering. Don’t forget you’ve already got two of the young
folk, Bao-yu and Cousin Lin, to pay for besides your own contribution. It’s all very well
promising to pay these additional twelve taels for Li Wan in the heat of the moment,
but later on you’ll be wish?ing you hadn’t. You’ll probably end up by saying that it
was all because of that wretched Feng that you had to pay out so much money and
think of some trick for getting it back from me three or four times over. I know. Don’t
tell me I’m imagin?ing this.’
This made everyone laugh.
‘All right,’ said Grandmother Jia, laughing herself. ‘Then what do you propose?’
‘Well now, it isn’t even my birthday yet, but already I’m feeling uncomfortable
because so much is being done for me,’ said Xi-feng. ‘It seems unlucky—so many
people being put to so much expense on my account while I don’t pay a penny myself.
Pd feel a lot easier if you’d let me pay this contribution for Li Wan; then, when the
day comes, I shall be able to eat and drink as much as I like without any fear of
spoiling my luck.’
Grandmother Jia hesitated, but consented when Lady Xing and Lady Wang both
insisted that this was the best solution.
‘I’ve got another suggestion to make,’ said xi-feng. ‘Your own contribution Is twenty
taels, Grandma, and on top of that you’re going to be paying contributions for
Bao-chai and Cousin Lin. It’s true that Aunt Xue will be paying Cousin Chai’s
contribution on top of her twenty taels, but that doesn’t seem quite so unfair. What
does seem unfair to me is that Mother and Aunt Wang should be paying only sixteen
taels each for themselves, yet paying no extras at all for any of the young people. I
think you’re getting the worst of this arrange?ment, Grannie.’
‘See what a good girl my Feng is to me!’ said Grandmother Jia delightedly. ‘You’re
quite right, my dear. If you hadn’t mentioned it, I should have let them get away with
it—as usual!’
‘All you need do, Grannie, is to make the two young people their responsibility. Let
each pay for one of them.’
‘That’s fair,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Yes, that’s what I’ll do.’
Lai Da’s old mother rose up from her stool in mock indig?nation.
‘But this is rank mutiny! It makes me feel really angry on Their Ladyships’ behalf.
What, side with Her Old Ladyship against your husband’s mother and your own
father’s sister? That’s a arrant breach of the laws o’ consanguinity!’
This sally was greeted with a burst of laughter from Grand?mother Jia and all the
others present. Old Mrs Lai remained standing until it had subsided and then made
her own offer.
‘If Mrs Zhu and Mrs Lian are each contributing twelve taels, I suppose we’d better
go a step lower?’
‘Oh no, that won’t do at all!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You may be a step below them
in rank, but you’re all wealthy women. I know you’ve got lots more money than they
have. You can’t give more, of course, but at least you should give as much.’
The old women, led by Mrs Lai, willingly agreed.
‘The girls’ contribution will be only for form’s sake, any?way,’ said Grandmother Jia
in reference to the row of figures sitting silently behind her on the kang. ‘I should
think about the equivalent of a month’s allowance would be the right amount?
She turned to Faithful.
‘Come on, now I We’re not leaving you out! Go and get some of the other girls
together and decide how much you are going to give.’
Faithful slipped out and presently returned with Patience, Aroma, Suncloud and one
or two other of the senior maids. Some said they would give one tael, others two.
Grandmother Jia noticed that Patience was one of them.
‘Surely you’ll be doing something for your mistress at home?’ she said. ‘You don’t
need to contribute to this fund as well.’
‘Yes, ma’am, I shall be doing something at home,’ said Patience, ‘but that’s private.
This is a public thing, so I shall contribute to this along with the rest.’
Grandmother Jia smiled at her graciously and commended her public spirit.
‘Well,’ said Xi-feng genially, ‘now just about everyone seems to have been roped in
except Aunt Zhou and Aunt Zhao. Wouldn’t it be a politeness to ask them if they
would like to contribute as well? They might take it as a slight if we left them out.’
‘Of course,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Whatever made me forget about them? They
probably won’t be free to come over, though. One of the maids had better go and ask
them.’
One of the maids had gone off on this mission almost before she had finished
speaking. She returned, after a long interval, to say that the concubines would
contribute two taels each.
‘Good!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Now take a brush and ink, someone, and calculate
how much we shall have altogether.’
In the interval thus created, You-shi addressed Xi-feng in a scornful whisper.
‘What a mean, grasping young woman you are! Your aunt and your mother-in-law
and all these other people forking out for your birthday, yet you still have to go
squeezing more out of two poor, dried-up old gourds like Zhou and Zhao!’
Xi-feng laughed silently.
‘Don’t talk nonsense!’ she whispered back. ‘I’ll settle accounts with you presently,
when we get out of here. Any?way, what do you mean, “poor”? Whenever they’ve
got any money they only pass it straight on to other people. We might just as well
intercept it before it gets into the hands of their creditors and get a bit of pleasure
out of it!’
By the time this whispered exchange was over, the calcula?tions had been completed
and it was announced that the amounts promised totalled a round sum of one
hundred and fifty taels with a few taels left over.
‘That’s more than we could possibly spend on plays and wine in one day,’ said
Grandmother Jia.
‘As we’re not inviting anyone from outside,’ said You-shi, ‘it won’t be a very big
party, either. There should be enough for two or three days. The big saving, of course,
is that now you’ve got your own troupe of players, you can have first-class
entertainment for nothing.’
‘Feng shall have whatever troupe she prefers,’ said Grand?mother Jia. ‘That’s for
her to decide.’
‘We’ve heard our own troupe so often,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I think we should spend a bit
of money and get in a troupe from outside.’
‘Well, I propose to leave all the arrangements for this in the hands of Cousin Zhen’s
wife,’ said Grandmother Jia, then Feng will have nothing at all to worry about -
except how to get the greatest possible enjoyment out of her birthday!’
You-shi agreed to be organizer, after which she and the others stayed charting for a
few minutes with Grandmother Jia. Then, realizing that the old lady’s stock of energy
was ex?hausted, they gradually dispersed.
After the three younger women had seen Lady Xing and Lady Wang a part of their
way home, You-shi accompanied Xi-feng to the latter’s apartment to discuss with her
what arrangements she should make for the party.
‘Don’t ask me,’ said Xi-feng when You-shi questioned her. ‘You want to study
Grandmother and just do whatever seems to please her.’
‘You really are the limit, you know,’ said You-shi. ‘For?tune’s darling! I thought just
now that I was being called over about something serious, but it turned out to be just
for this! And then, if you please, quite apart from being asked to pay out money, I am
to have all the worry of arranging everything for you as well. What are you going to
do in return for all this, to show me your gratitude?’
‘What am I going to do in return?’ said Xi-feng. ‘You must be joking. I didn’t call you
over. If you’re afraid of the trouble, you’d better go back to Grandmother and tell her
to give the job to somebody else.’
‘Just look at her I’ said You-shi. ‘Really full of yourself today, aren’t you? I should
hold it in a bit, if I were you, my dear, or it might start running overt’
The two of them conversed for some minutes longer before finally separating.

*

When the first contributions arrived at Ning-guo House next morning, You-shi had
only just got up and was about to begin her toilet. She asked who had brought the
money, and on being informed that it was Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, sent the maid back to
fetch her in from the servants’ quarters, where she was waiting. When she arrived,
You-shi asked for a stool to be brought so that the old woman could sit and talk to
her while she continued with her toilet.
‘How many of the contributions have you got in this packet?’ You-shi asked her.
‘These are the ones from us servants,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife. ‘As they were all
ready, I thought I might as well bring them over straight away. The contributions from
Her Old Ladyship and the other ladies are still to come.’
Just then one of the maids came in to announce another arrival
‘The subscriptions from Mrs Xue and Lady Xing have arrived, ma’am.’
‘Subscriptions!’ said You-shi scornfully. ‘How eagerly you fasten on the ridiculous
word! It was only a passing fancy of Her Old Ladyship’s yesterday that we should
imitate what they do in poorer households. She used the word then as a joke; but
now, I suppose, we shall have every witless maid solemnly talking about
“subscriptions” all the time! Well, go and get the money and bring it in then. And
see that who?ever it is has some tea before they go.’
The girl went out and returned with the two packets of money that the messenger
had brought, one from Aunt Xue, including a contribution for Bao-chai, and one,
including Dai-yu’s contribution, from Lady Xing.
‘Who does that leave now?’ said You-shi.
‘That leaves Her Old Ladyship, Her Ladyship, the young ladies and the maids,’ said
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife.
‘What about Mrs Zhu’s?’ said You-shi.
Mrs Lian will be paying Out the money for all the others,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife, ‘so
you’ll be able to get Mrs Zhu’s from her too when you see her about the rest.’
You-shi, having completed her toilet, now called for her carriage. As soon as it was
ready, she drove round to the Rong-guo mansion and went straight in to see Xi-feng.
She found her with the money already packeted and on the point of bringing it round
to her.
‘Is it all here?’ You-shi asked her.
‘All there,’ said Xi-feng gaily. ‘Hurry up and take it away. I don’t want to he
responsible for it if it gets lost.’
‘I don’t think I altogether trust you,’ said You-shi, return?ing her smile. ‘I think I’d
like to check it first in your presence.’
She opened up the packet and counted the money contained in it. The contribution
for Li Wan appeared to be missing.
‘I thought you were up to something,’ she said. ‘Why isn’t the money for Wan
here?’
Xi-feng smiled disarmingly.
‘Isn’t what you’ve already got there enough? Surely her little bit isn’t going to make
all that much difference? Why not wait and see what you need? If you find you
haven’t got enough, I’ll give the money for Wan to you later.’
‘I’m not letting you get away with this,’ said You-shi, ‘—playing the Lady Bountiful
yesterday in front of all those others and then going back on it now, when the two of
us are alone together. I shall have to go and ask Lady Jia for the money.’
‘You’re a hard woman!’ said Xi-feng. ‘One of these days when I have you at a
disadvantage, you mustn’t complain if you find me just as much of a stickler.’
‘Threats?’ said You-shi. ‘I think you are the one who should feel afraid. Do you think
if it weren’t for the things you have done for me in the past I would let you off now?
Here, Patience!’—She took Patience’s contribution from the pile and held it out to
her ‘Take this back. If later on I find that I need it, I’ll make it good with my own
money.’
Patience immediately understood what she was getting at and answered in the same
vein.
‘No, Mrs Zhen, you keep it. If you find you have any left over, you can give it back to
me afterwards.’
‘Take it,’ said You-shi. ‘Is your mistress the only one who’s allowed to break the
rules? Mayn’t I do favours too, if I want to?’
Patience was obliged to take the money from her.
‘Seeing your mistress so tight-fisted,’ said You-shi, ‘I often wonder what she’s going
to do with all this money she saves. Take it with her in her coffin?’
With that parting shot she went off to see Grandmother Jia. After greeting the old
lady and exchanging a few generalities, she went into Faithful’s room for a more
serious discussion of arrangements for the birthday party. The ‘discussion’ con?sisted
quite simply in finding out what would give Grand?mother Jia most pleasure and
deciding that that was what they should do. When all had been settled between
them and You?-shi was rising to go, she took out the two taels that Faithful had
contributed and handed them back to her.
‘Here you are. We shan’t be needing this.’
From Grandmother Jia’s apartment she went over to have a few words with Lady
Wang. When Lady Wang presently left her to go into her Buddhist chapel, You-shi
took advant?age of her absence to return Suncloud’s contribution; then, since xi-feng
was safely out of the way, she offered Aunt Zhou and Aunt Zhao their contributions
as well. But the con?cubines were too scared to take them.
‘Go on I’ said You-shi encouragingly. ‘I know how hard-up you are. You can’t afford
to give away money like this. If Feng finds Out, I shall take full responsibility myself.’
They took the money then, voluble in their gratitude.

*

In a twinkling the second of the ninth was upon them. The denizens of the Garden
had been informed that You-shi was planning an impressive variety of entertainment:
not only the customary plays, but also juggling, acrobatics, story-telling by blind
ballad-singers—in short, everything one could possibly think of that might contribute
to the success of the occasion and the pleasure of the participants.
Li Wan reminded the cousins that the second of the month was also one of the
regular meeting-days of the poetry club. Xi-chun was, of course, excused.
‘But why hasn’t Bao-yu turned up?’ she asked. ‘I suppose he’s so intent on enjoying
the film that he has forgotten his former enthusiasm for these more civilized
amusements!—Go and see what he’s doing,’ she said to one of the maids, ‘and tell
him to come here immediately.’
The maid was a long time gone.
‘Miss Aroma says he went out first thing this morning,’ she reported when she
eventually returned.
The others were incredulous.
‘That’s ridiculous. How could he possibly have gone out? The girl must have got the
message wrong.’
They sent Ebony over to ask again; but Ebony only confirmed what the first maid had
said.
‘Yes, lie really has gone out. It seems that one of his friends has died and he’s had
to go out to condole.’
‘That’s absolutely absurd,’ said Tan-chun. ‘Whatever the reason, he can’t possibly
have gone out today. Fetch Aroma here and I’ll speak to her myself.’
As if anticipating a summons, Aroma herself walked in while she was saying this. Li
Wan tackled her at once.
‘There’s absolutely no justification for his going out today, whatever the reason,’
she said. ‘In the first place it’s Mrs Lian’s birthday and Her Old Ladyship was
particularly anxious that we should all join in celebrating it this year: it’s monstrous
that he should go off on his own like this when everyone else from both houses is
here for the celebration. And in the second place this is the first regular meeting of
our poetry club and he hasn’t even asked leave to stay away.’
Aroma sighed miserably.
‘Last night he told me that he had some important business to attend to first thing
this morning. He said he had to go to the Prince of Beijing’s palace, but that he would
be back again as soon as possible. I told him not to go, but he insisted. When he got
up first thing this morning, he asked for a suit of mourning to wear. It looks as if some
important person in the Prince of Beijing’s household must have died.’
‘If that’s really so,’ said Li Wan, ‘then he ought to have gone. But then, on the other
hand, he ought to have got back by now.’
After a brief discussion the cousins decided to proceed without him and to punish
him in some way when he returned. Before they could begin, however, a summons
arrived from Grandmother Jia to join her in the mansion. As soon as they had done
so, Aroma reported Bao-yu’s absence. The old lady was displeased and sent someone
to fetch him back.
Bao-yu, evidently with some secret business on his mind, had spoken the day before
to Tealeaf about this excursion,
‘I have to go out first thing tomorrow,’ he told him. ‘I want you to be waiting for me
outside the back gate with two horses ready saddled. No one else is to accompany
me but you. Tell Li Gui that I am going to the Prince of Beijing’s, and that he must
stop anyone going out to look for me. He can tell them that the Prince is detaining
me and that I shall come back as soon as I can get away.’
Though somewhat mystified by these orders, Tealeaf felt he had no choice but to
follow them out, and before dawn next morning was waiting with two horses ready
saddled outside the tear gate of the Garden. As soon as it was light, Bao-yu, dressed
in heavy mourning, emerged from the postern, leaped onto one of the waiting horses,
and crouching down over the reins, set off at a brisk trot down the street—all
without utter?ing a single word.
Tealeaf leaped onto the second horse, gave it the whip, and did his best to catch up
with Bao-yu, at the same time shouting after him to inquire where they were going.
‘Where does this road lead to?’ Bao-yu asked him.
‘This is the main road to the North Gate,’ said Tealeaf. Outside the city it’s pretty
deserted in that direction. You won’t find much to amuse you there.’
Good,’ said Bao-yu. The more deserted the better.’
And by applying the whip he made his horse shoot on ahead, and presently, after a
couple of turns, had left the city gate behind him.
Tealeaf, more mystified than ever, followed him as closely as he could. When they
had galloped without stopping for two or three miles, in the course of which the
signs of human habitation had gradually grown more and more sparse, Bao-yu finally
reined to a halt and turned back to ask Tealeaf if there was anywhere where they
could purchase some incense.
‘I dare say we could find somewhere,’ said Tealeaf without much conviction. ‘It
depends what kind of incense you want.’
Bao-yu reflected for some moments.
‘Honeybush, sandal and lakawood,’ he said. ‘It has to be those three.’
‘I doubt if you’ll be able to get them,’ said Tealeaf, smiling at the na?veté of one
who could expect to make such purchases in such a place. But when he saw that
Bao-yu was genuinely distressed, he added: What’s it for? I’ve noticed that you often
carry powdered incense in that sachet you wear. Why not see if you’ve got any in
that?’
Bao-yu, glad to be reminded, extracted the silk purse that he wore suspended from
his neck underneath the front fold of his gown, felt inside it with his fingers, and was
delighted to find that there was still a pinch or two of powdered agalloch in the
bottom.
‘Seems a bit lacking in respect to use this though,’ he thought.
‘Still, it’s more respectful to use something I’ve carried all the way here myself than
it would be to use something I’d just bought in a shop.’
Having decided that the powdered incense would do, he asked Tealeaf where he
could get hold of an incense-burner and some fire.
‘Now those we can’t get,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Where could we, out here in the middle of
the wilds? If you knew you were going to need them, why didn’t you tell me
beforehand, and we could have brought them with us?’
‘Stupid idiot I’ said Bao-yu. ‘Do you honestly think we could have ridden out at this
break-neck pace if we’d been carrying an incense-burner full of hot coals with us?’
Tealeaf, after some moments of reflection, smiled uncertainly:
‘I know what we could do, Master, though I don’t know what you’ll think of the
idea. There’s little enough hope of our getting the things you’ve just asked for round
here, and the chances are that even if we could, you’d only start thinking of
something else you needed that was even harder to get. Now if we were to go on for
about another two thirds of a mile in this direction, we should come to the Temple of
the Water Spirit Bao-yu pricked up his ears.
‘The Temple of the Water Spirit? Is that near here? Good. That will do even better.
Let’s go there then.’
With a touch of the whip he was away once more, still talk?ing to Tealeaf over his
shoulder as he rode ahead.
‘The nun at the Water Spirit is one of our regular callers. If I see her when we get
there and tell her we want to use one of her burners, she’s sure to let us.’
‘Even if this wasn’t one of the temples we subscribe to,’ said Tealeaf, ‘I’m sure they
wouldn’t dare refuse if you asked them. But why is it that today you are so willing to
go to the Temple of the Water Spirit when normally you can scarcely abide to hear it
mentioned?’
‘The reason I normally feel that way about it,’ said Bao-yu, ‘is because I hate the
silly, senseless way in which vulgar people offer worship and build temples to gods
they know nothing about. Ignorant old men and women with too much money to
spend hear the name of some god or other—they’ve no idea who it is, but the mere
fact that they’ve heard it from the lips of some ballad-singer or story-teller seems to
them incontrovertible proof of the god’s existence—and go found?ing temples in
which these fictitious deities can he worshipped.
‘Take this Temple of the Water Spirit. The reason it’s called that is because the
divinity worshipped in it is supposed to be the goddess of the river Luo. Now in point
of fact no Goddess of the Luo ever existed. She was an invention of the poet Cao Zhi.
But that didn’t stop a lot of people making an image of her and worshipping it.
‘The only reason I feel differently about this temple today is because the idea of a
water-goddess just happens to fit in with the thing that is at the moment uppermost
in my mind; so I’m glad to make use of it for my own purpose.’
By this time they had reached the gate of the temple. The old nun who kept it, hardly
less surprised to hear of Bao-yu’s arrival than she would have been if she had been
told that a dragon had just fallen, alive and kicking, out of the sky, hur?ried out to
greet him, and ordered the old temple-servant who did duty as a porter to take care
of the horses.
Bao-yu went on inside. Instead of bowing down before the image, however, he stood
and contemplated it appraisingly. Though the goddess was only a thing of wood and
plaster and paint, the sculptor who made her had succeeded in capturing some of
the spirit of Cao Zhi’s famous description. To Bao?-yu’s gazing eyes she did indeed
appear as the poet portrayed her:

             Fluttering like the wing-beats of a startled swan,
             Swaying with the lissome curves of a water-dragon...

Cao Zhi’s beautiful images came crowding into his mind:

             Like a lotus flower emerging from the green water,
             Like the morning sun rising above the mist-bank...

And as he gazed and remembered, the tears coursed down his cheeks.
The old nun now appeared with some tea. While he sipped it, Bao-yu took the
opportunity of asking her if he might borrow an incense-burner. At this she
disappeared once more, to reappear, after considerable delay, carrying not only a
burner but also a whole portion of incense and a set of garishly printed
‘picture-offerings’. Refusing all but the burner, Bao-yu made Tealeaf carry it outside
into the rear courtyard of the temple, where he set about choosing a suitably dean
spot on
which to make his offering. Nowhere would do, however, until Tealeaf suggested
placing the burner on the stone plat?form of the well. To this suggestion Bao-yu
assented with a nod, and when Tealeaf had set down the burner and retired to a
respectful distance, he took out his pinch of agalloch and dropped it on the burning
charcoal; then, with tears in his eyes, he knelt down and made, not a kotow, but the
sort of half-obeisance one makes to the spirit of a junior or a servant.
Having concluded his little ceremony, Bao-yu got up and ordered Tealeaf to take the
burner back into the temple. But Tealeaf, though saying that he would, did nothing of
the kind. Instead he threw himself on his knees, kotowed several times, and began
praying aloud in the direction of the well
‘O spirit, in all the years I have served Master Bao this is the first time he has ever
kept anything from me. But though I don’t know who you are, O spirit, and don’t like
to ask, one thing I do know, and that is that you are sure to be some won?drously
beautiful, clever, refined young female. And since Master Bao isn’t able to tell you
Out loud what he wants of you, I, Tealeaf, am praying to you on his behalf.
‘I beseech you, if you still have feelings as you used to when you were on earth,
watch over my master from time to time, O spirit. I know you belong to a different
world now, but being as it’s for a special friend of yours that I’m asking this, please do
it if you can, spirit, for old time’s sake.
‘And please use what influence you can to see that Master Bao is reborn in his next
life as a girl, so that he can spend all his time with you; and don’t let him be reborn as
one of those horrible Whiskered Males he is always on about.’
At this point he knocked his head several more times on the ground. Bao-yu, who
had been listening, could no longer hold back his laughter. Observing that Tealeaf had
raised him?self once more on all fours and appeared to be about to go on, he kicked
him and told him to get up.
‘Stop this nonsense! If anyone hears you, I shall become a laughing-stock.’
Tealeaf scrambled to his feet, picked up the burner and fol?lowed Bao-yu inside.
‘I’ve already spoken to the nun about getting you some food,’ he told Bao-yu as
they were going in together. ‘I told her you hadn’t eaten yet. You ought to get
something inside you. I realize that you came out here because there’s a big party
and lots of racket at home today and you wanted some?where peaceful where you
could do this. But I think just stay?ing out here in the quiet all day is showing all the
respect you need to this person you’ve just made the offering to. You don’t need to
fast all day as well. That’s out of the question.’
‘That seems reasonable,’ said Bao-yu. ‘As I’m missing the patty all the time that I’m
here, I am in a way abstaining al?ready; so I suppose there can be no harm in my
taking a bit of vegetarian stuff.’
‘I’m glad to hear you say so,’ said Tealeaf. ‘Of course, there is another way of
looking at it. Your going off like this is sure to cause others at home to worry. Now if
no one at home was likely to worry, there’d be no harm in our not going back until
evening. But since they are going to worry, I really think you ought to be getting back
soon. For one thing it will set Their Ladyships’ minds at rest, and for another, it will, in
the long run, be more respectful to this person you’ve just made the offering to.
Because if you go home, even if you drink and watch plays, it won’t be because you
want to, but out of duty to Their Ladyships. Whereas if you stay out here thinking
only about the spirit and not caring how worried you make Their Ladyships, you’ll in
fact be making the spirit herself uneasy to think of all the anxiety that’s being caused
on her behalf. Think it over, Master Bao, and see if you don’t agree with me.’
‘I can see what’s on your mind without much difficulty,’ said Bao-yu, laughing.
‘You’re afraid that as you are the only one who came out here with me, you will bear
all the blame for this outing when we get back. That’s the real reason why I’m being
treated to all this high-minded advice, isn’t it? Well, don’t worry! It was all along my
intention to go back to the party when I had made the offering. I never said anything
about staying out here all day. I’ve discharged my vow. If I hurry home now so that
the others aren’t too worried, it seems to me that my obligations to the dead and the
living swill both be met.’
Tealeaf expressed his relief. Still talking, they made their way to the old nun’s parlour,
or hall of meditation’, where they found she had set out a very presentable (though,
of course, vegetarian) repast for them. After briefly sampling it, the two of them
mounted and set off again along the road by which they had come Bao-yu at such a
pace that Tealeaf was obliged to call out after him to slacken it.
‘Go easy on that horse, Master Bad! He hasn’t been ridden very much; you need to
keep a pretty tight rein on him.’
Soon they had entered the city gate, and not long after-wards might have been seen
slipping into the back gate of the Garden. Bao-yu hurried straight to Green Delights,
which he found deserted except for a few old nannies left behind as care-takers.
‘Holy Name!’ they said, their old faces lighting up with pleasure when they saw
who it was. ‘You’ve come at last! You’ve had Miss Aroma nigh out of her mind with
worry. They’re sitting at table in the front now, Master. Better hurry up and join
them.’
Bao-yu quickly took off his mourning clothes and went off to look for something
more colourful to change into.
‘Where is the party?’ he asked the old women as soon as he had dressed.
‘In the new reception room.’
He hurried, by the shortest route, towards the faint sounds of fluting and singing that
could soon be heard coming from the so-called ‘new’ reception hall that the old
women had referred to. As he approached the gallery through which he must pass to
reach it, he came upon Silver, sitting under the eaves of the covered way and crying.
She left off hurriedly when she saw him coming.
‘Here comes the phoenix at last!’ she said sarcastically. ‘Hurry up and go inside. If
you stay away much longer, there’ll be a riot!’
Bao-yu smiled at her sympathetically.
‘Guess where I’ve been.’
She ignored his question and turned away from him to wipe her eyes. He hurried on,
dejected because of his inability to comfort her. When he entered the hall were the
others were assembled and went up to greet his grandmother and his mother, it
really was as if a phoenix had appeared. Hurriedly he made his birthday kotow to
Xi-feng.
‘What do you mean by going off on your own like that?’ Grandmother Jia grumbled.
‘I never heard of such a thing. If this happens again, I shall tell your father when he
comes back and get him to give you another beating.’
Bao-yu’s pages came in next for her censure.
‘Why do they listen to him - rushing off like that whenever he tells them to? They
should tell us first. Where have you been, anyway?’ she asked him. ‘Have you had
anything to eat? Has anything happened to give you a fright?’
‘The Prince of Beijing’s favourite concubine died yester?day,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I went to
condole with him. He was in such a state when I got there that I didn’t like to leave
im?mediately. That’s why I’ve been so long.’
‘If you sneak out again without first telling us,’ said Grand?mother Jia, ‘I really shall
tell your Pa to beat you.’
Though Bao-yu promised to obey, she still wanted to have his pages whipped; but the
others all begged for a reprieve:
‘Don’t take it to heart, Grandmother! He’s already said he won’t do it again. And
anyway, he’s back now, so we can for?get our worries and concentrate on enjoying
ourselves’
Grandmother Jia had in fact been extremely worried and her anxiety had made her
vengeful. Now that Bao-yu was back and she was no longer worried, her vengeful
feelings evapor?ated and the subject of beatings was quickly dropped. Her concern
now was lest Bao-yu should have been unduly dis?tressed by his visit, or have failed
to eat enough while he was away, or have been involved in some accident on the way
there or back. While she continued to fuss over him, Aroma took her place at his side
to wait upon him, and the rest of the company resumed the play-watching which his
arrival had interrupted.
The play being performed on this occasion was The Wooden Hairpin. Grandmother
Jia and the other ladies found it greatly affecting, shedding copious teats in the
course of it and sighing or cursing in the appropriate places.
The events that ensued will be told in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 44

Xi-feng’s jealousy is the object of an unexpected provocation
And Patience’s toilet is a source of unexpected delight



BAO-YU having now taken his place amongst the girls, they and the rest of the
company were once more able to give their undivided attention to the players.
The play being performed on this occasion was, as we noted at the end of the
previous chapter, The Wooden Hairpin, and it chanced that they had reached that
section of it popularly re?ferred to as ‘The Husband’s Offering’, in which the hero
Wang Shi-peng, believing that his wife has drowned herself, goes with his aged
mother to the river Ou-jiang to make offerings to her soul. At this point Dai-yu, who
was able to guess what the real purpose of Bao-yu’s early-morning excursion had
been, turned to Bao-chai and remarked, in a voice loud enough for Bao-yu to
overhear, that she thought Wang Shi-peng a ‘very silly sort of fellow
‘He could have made his offering anywhere. Why was it necessary for him to go
rushing off to the riverside to make it? They say that “objects aid recall”: well, since
all the water in the world comes ultimately from a single source, a bowlful of it
scooped up anywhere should have sufficed. His feelings could have been just as
effectively relieved by weeping over a bowlful of water as by rushing off to the banks
of the river.’
Bao-chai made no reply. Bao-yu, who had certainly heard her, turned away and called
for hot wine to drink Xi-feng’s health with.
Grandmother Jia was determined that this should be a day like no other and that
Xi-feng should derive the greatest possible enjoyment from it. Not feeling sufficiently
energetic to sit with the rest, however, she had retired to the inner room with Aunt
Xue, reclining on a couch there in a position from which it was still possible to watch
the players. A small selection from the dishes which had covered the two tables laid
for her outside had been set down within easy reach where she could pick at them
while conversing with Aunt Xue. The remainder she had made over to the maids and
older women on duty who had not been catered for, bidding them take their banquet
outside on to the verandah where they could sit down and enjoy themselves without
restraint.
Lady Wang and Lady Xing also sat in this inner room, not on the kang, where
Grandmother Jia’s couch had been placed, but at a high-topped table on the floor
below. The young people sat at a number of tables in the outer room. From time to
time Grandmother Jia would give orders to You-shi to make sure that Xi-feng was
enjoying herself.
‘Make her sit at the head. Why isn’t she sitting at the head? It’s up to you to act as
hostess on my behalf,’ she told You?-shi. ‘The poor child is run off her feet all the rest
of the year. Today I want her to be made a fuss of.’
You-shi went off to do her bidding, but shortly afterwards returned, a smile on her
face, to announce that Xi-feng was being difficult.
‘She says she’s not used to sitting at the head. She says it makes her uncomfortable.
And she refuses to drink anything.’
‘If you can’t make her, I shall have to come out and deal with her myself,’ said
Grandmother Jia, laughing.
This brought Xi-feng herself running up. She spoke to Grandmother Jia from behind
You-shi’s shoulder.
‘Don’t believe her, Grannie. I’ve had lots and lots to drink.’
‘Now look here,’ said Grandmother Jia to You-shi, ‘I want you to march this young
woman back to her seat and force her to sit down in it. Then I want every one of you
here to drink with her in turn. If she still refuses, I really and truly shall come out and
deal with her myself.’
You-shi hauled Xi-feng out again, cal1ed for larger cups to be brought, and poured
her out some wine.
There you are, my darling! In token of my appreciation of the noble way in which you
have served Lady Jia and Lady Wang and me during the past year, please accept this
cup of wine that I have poured out for you with my own fair hand!’
‘If you are really serious about wanting to show me your appreciation,’ said Xi-feng,
‘you ought to offer it to me kneel?ing down.’
‘Just listen to that!’ said You-shi. ‘I’ll tell you something, my girl you just don’t
realize how lucky you are. For all you know, things may never be as good as this for
you again. If I were you, I’d have a good booze-up while you can. Come on, two cups!’
You-shi was so insistent that in the end Xi-feng had to drink two whole cupfuls from
the larger cups. After that the cousins came up one by one to drink with her, which
meant that she had to take at least a sip or two with each of them. Then old Mrs Lai,
observing with what high spirits Grand-mother Jia was watching these antics,
determined to join in the fun too, and came over, with the other old nannies, to drink
Xi-feng’s health along with all the rest. Because of the seniority of this group, it
would have been difficult for Xi-eng to refuse them, so with each of them too she
had to take a couple of sips. But when Faithful and the maids came trooping up, it
was more than flesh and blood could bear and she begged to be excused.
Really, my dears, I couldn’t. Let me put it off until to?morrow.’
Faithful pretended to take umbrage.
‘I call that most insulting! Even Her Ladyship treats me with more consideration. I
used to think that I counted for something round here, but now, after being put in my
place in front of all these others, I can see that I did wrong to come. Well, if you
won’t drink, I’m going!’
She turned away and began marching out, but Xi-feng ran after and detained her.
‘No, please! I’ll drink,’
She fetched the wine herself, filled a cup to the brim with it’ and drank it down to the
last drop, up-ending it afterwards to show that it was dry. At that Faithful laughed
and went away content.
As soon as she had resumed her seat, Xi-feng knew that she had drunk too much. Her
heart was pounding in her throat and she felt an overwhelming desire to go back
home and lie down. But the leader of the jugglers was bearing down on her.
‘Give this man his money,’ she said, turning to You-shi, ‘I have to go home to wash.’
You-shi nodded, and Xi-feng, choosing a moment when no one was looking, slipped
outside and made her way along the outside of the hall under the shadow of the
eaves. Patience, who had seen her go and was concerned about her, hurried after
and gave her some support.
As they approached the passage-way which led from Grand?mother Jia’s rear
courtyard to the gallery in the midst of the little enclosure surrounded by wails and
buildings which had once been the scene of Jia Rui’s night-long sufferings, they
recognized one of the junior maids from their own apartment standing there, who, as
soon as she caught sight of them, turned tail and ran, Xi-feng at once became
suspicious and called out after her. The little maid at first pretended not to hear, but
when the shouting behind her continued, could no longer keep up the pretence and
had to turn about and face them.
Xi-feng’s suspicions were now thoroughly aroused. Ad?vancing into the gallery and
calling the maid back into it, she first made Patience close the partitions, so that they
were com?pletely cut off from the outside, then, seating herself on the gallery’s
stone plinth and ordering the maid to kneel down in front of her, she told Patience in
a fierce, loud voice to fetch two pages from the inner gate with a rope and whips to
‘flog to a jelly’ this abominable creature who had so little regard for the presence of
her mistress. The wretched girl, already half-dead with fright, now wept for terror
and knocked her head repeatedly on the ground, entreating Xi-feng for mercy.
‘I’m not a ghost,’ said Xi-feng. ‘You’re supposed to stand still and wait when you see
me coming. What do you mean by running away from me like that?’
‘I didn’t see you at first, ma’am,’ said the little girl tearfully. ‘I was running because
I’d just remembered that there was no one at home to look after things.’
‘If there’s no one at home, you had no business to go out in the first place,’ said
Xi-feng. ‘And even if you didn’t see me, you must have heard me calling you. Patience
and I shouted to you at the tops of our voices ten or a dozen times, but you only ran
the faster. We weren’t all that far away from you, either, and you certainly aren’t deaf.
How dare you lie to me!’
She raised her hand and dealt the girl a slap on the cheek that made her reel, quickly
followed by a second slap on the other cheek. An angry red patch swelled up
instantly on either side of the girl’s face.
‘Don’t, madam. You’ll hurt your hand,’ Patience pleaded.
‘Hit her for me, then,’ said Xi-feng, ‘and ask her why she ran away. If she still won’t
talk, tear her lips!’
At first the maid tried sticking to her story, but when she heard that Xi-feng was going
to heat an iron red-hot and burn her mouth with it, she broke down and tearfully
confessed that Jia Lian was at home and had stationed her in the passage-way to look
out for her mistress and give him warning of her coming; hut as Xi-feng had left the
party so much earlier than expected, she had been taken unawares.
This seemed to Xi-feng to have the ring of truth about it.
‘Why did he ask you to look out for me?’ she asked. ‘Surely I’m allowed to go back
to my own room? There must have been a reason. Tell me. If you do, from now on I
shall love you and be your friend. But if you don’t, I shall take a knife and cut your
flesh with it!’
To reinforce her threat, she plucked a formidable hairpin from her hair and jabbed it
violently in the neighbourhood of the girl’s mouth, causing her to dodge this way and
that from it in terror.
‘I’ll tell, madam, I’ll tell. Only please don’t let him know that it was me that told
you,’ she wept and implored.
Patience begged Xi-feng not to hurt the girl, at the same time urging the girl to make
a clean breast of what she had to say. The story then came out.
‘Mr Lian came in a while ago and had a bit of a nap. When he woke up, he sent
someone to see what you were doing. They brought word back that your birthday
party had only just started and you wouldn’t be back for ages, so he opened the
chest and took out two pieces of silver and two hairpins and two lengths of satin and
told me to go and give them in secret to Bao Er’s missus and tell her to come over. So
then she came over to our room and Mr Lian made me go and wait in the passage
here and look out for you. And that’s really all I know.’
Xi-feng was by now shaking all over with anger. She pulled herself to her feet
notwithstanding and strode off swiftly towards the house. As she approached the
gateway of the court?yard, another little maid popped her head out but quickly drew
it in again and ran when she saw that it was Xi-feng. When Xi-feng called to her by
name, however, this maid, being more quick-witted than the other one, neither went
on retreating nor stood still, but simply turned about and came running up to Xi-feng
outside, an obsequious little smile upon her face.
‘Oh madam, I was just going over to tell you when I saw you coming here yourself.’
‘Tell me what?’ said Xi-feng.
The girl then proceeded to relate voluntarily what the other girl had just told under
duress.
Xi-feng spat contemptuously.
‘You’ve left it a bit late, haven’t you—waiting until you see me and then trying to
act the innocent?’
She raised her hand and struck the girl a blow that sent her staggering, then,
tiptoeing across the courtyard, applied her ear to the window to hear what was going
on inside.
The first thing she heard was a laugh and a woman’s voice.
‘The best thing that could happen to you,’ it was saying, ‘would be if that hell-cat
wife of yours was to die.’
‘Suppose she did,’ Jia Lian’s voice said in answer, ‘and I married another one who
turned out to be just as bad?’
‘If she was to die,’ said the first voice, ‘you ought to make Patience your Number
One. I’m sure she’d be better than this one.’
‘Patience won’t let me come near her nowadays,’ said Jia Lian. ‘She has a lot to put
up with, the same as me, that she doesn’t dare talk about. I don’t know, I reckon I
must have been born under a hen-pecked husbands’ star!’
Xi-feng heard this shaking with fury. The couple’s praise of Patience made her at once
suspect that Patience had been com?plaining about her behind her back. The fumes
of wine mounted up inside her, clouding her judgement. Without pausing to reflect,
she turned and struck Patience twice before kicking open the door and striding into
the room. There, without more ado, she proceeded to seize hold of Bao Er’s wife and
belabour her, breaking off only to block the doorway with her body in case Jia Lian
might think of escaping.
‘Filthy whore!’ she shouted. ‘Stealing a husband isn’t enough for you, it seems. You
have to murder his wife as well!’ She turned to Patience: ‘Go on, Patience, your place
is over there with them—with that whoremaster of yours and his other whore!
You’re all three in this together. You hate me just as much as they do under that
smarmy outside of yours I’
This was followed by several blows.
Poor Patience, overwhelmed by so much injustice, had only Bao Er’s wife on whom
she could vent her feelings.
‘If you have to do these shameful things,’ she said, ‘you might at least leave me out
of it.’ And she began to pummel the woman in her turn.
Now Jia Lian had had a good deal to drink that day, and because of the euphoric state
he was in, had taken insufficient precautions against surprise. Xi-feng’s unexpected
arrival had therefore left him completely at a loss. But Patience’s outburst was
another matter. The wine he had drunk rekindled his for?gotten valour; and whereas
the anger and shame he felt at seeing Xi-feng beat Bao Er’s wife had rendered him
speech?less, the sight of Patience doing the same thing so roused his valiancy that he
shouted at her and gave her a kick.
‘Little whore! You want to join in too, do you?’
Patience, whose gentle nature was easily overawed, at once left off, tearfully
protesting that it was cruel of them to speak about her in such a way behind her
back.
Xi-feng, furious that Patience should be afraid of Jia Lian, rushed over and began
striking her again, insisting that she should go on beating Bao Er’s wife and take no
notice of him. Finding herself thus attacked on both sides simultaneously by the pair
of them, Patience became so desperate that she dashed from the room, vowing that
she would find a knife and kill herself, and would undoubtedly have done herself an
injury if the maids and nannies from outside had not seized her and gradually talked
her out of it.
Xi-feng’s reaction when Patience dashed off threatening suicide was to ram her head
into Jia Lian’s chest and shout hysterically.
‘You’re all in league against me, and now you’re trying to frighten me because I
overheard you. I don’t care. Kill me! Strangle me!’
Jia Lian, in a fury, snatched a sword down from the wall and drew it from its
scabbard.
‘There’s no need for any of you to talk about suicide. I’m desperate too. I’ll kill the
lot of you and swing for it. That’ll make a clean end of the business!’
Just as the rumpus was at its height, You-shi arrived with a crowd of others.
‘What on earth is happening? A moment ago everyone was enjoying themselves,
and now here you all are shouting at each other!’
With the arrival of this audience Jia Lian pretended to be even drunker than he really
was, striking a fiercely threatening attitude and behaving as if he was seriously
intending to kill Xi-feng with his sword. Xi-feng, on the other hand, dropped me
shrewishness she had up to then been showing as soon as she saw them come and,
breaking quickly away, ran weeping to Grandmother Jia.
The play had already ended when Xi-feng burst in upon the aged matriarch and flung
herself trembling upon her bosom.
‘Save me, Grannie, save me! Mr Lian is going to kill me!’
‘What?’ cried Grandmother Jia, Lady Xing and Lady Wang in startled simultaneity.
‘When I went home just now to change my clothes,’ Xi-feng tearfully related, ‘I was
surprised to hear Mr Lian indoors talking to somebody. I was scared to go in straight
away, thinking it must be a guest, so I listened for a while outside the window. Then I
found that it wasn’t a guest that he was with but Bao Er’s wife, and they were saying
what a tyrant I was and planning to poison me so that he could marry Patience. I
became very angry then; but I didn’t want to make a scene with him. I struck
Patience a couple of times. All I did to him was ask him why he should want to kill me,
but he was so much put out by that that be tried to murder me on the spot.’
Grandmother Jia, believing this farrago to be true, was naturally appalled.
‘How dreadful! Bring the wretch here at once!’
But before the words were out of her mouth, Jia Lian him-self came running in,
sword in hand, with a crowd pursuing at his heels.
Grandmother Jia had always treated Jia Lian and Xi-feng with indulgence, and on this
occasion Jia Lian seemed to think that he could presume on this to riot in her
presence with impunity, totally disregarding the fact that his mother and aunt were
there as well. This deliberate flouting of their authority by a licensed favourite greatly
incensed the two ladies. They seized hold of him with angry scoldings, one on either
side.
‘Disgusting creature! Have you no sense of decency left whatever? Can’t you see
that Grandmother is here?’
‘It’s because Grandmother spoils her so much that she has become the way she is,’
said Jia Lian, leering at them through bloodshot eyes.
Lady Xing, having at last succeeded in wresting the sw6rd from his grasp, shouted at
him fiercely.
‘Get out of here at once!’
But Jia Lian remained where he was and went on talking and talking in the same
leering, disgusting manner, like a little boy who expects his naughtiness to be
admired. Grand?mother Jia, in a voice which shook with anger, uttered the only
threat that she knew would shift him.
‘I realize that we count for nothing with you. Fetch his father, some one, and see if
he’ll go then.’
At that Jia Lian finally shambled out. Sulkily avoiding the conjugal apartment, he took
himself off to his study outside.
After he had gone, Lady Xing and Lady Wang turned on Xi-feng and began scolding
her; but Grandmother Jia did what she could to comfort her by dismissing the
incident as unimportant.
‘Young men of his age are like hungry pussy-cats, my dear. There’s simply no way of
holding them. This sort of thing has always happened in big families like
ours—certainly ever since I can remember. It’s all my fault, anyway. I shouldn’t have
made you drink so much wine. It’s all turned to vinegar inside you.’
This made everyone laugh.
‘Don’t worry,’ she went on.’ I’ll see that he apologizes to you tomorrow. Just for
tonight, though, so as not to put him too much out of countenance, I think you had
better stay away from him.’
Her voice became harsher when she remembered Patience.
‘Little wretch! I always thought she seemed such a nice girl. To think that
underneath it all she should have been so wicked!’
You-shi laughed.
‘There’s nothing wrong with Patience. She just happened to be the person nearest
at hand for Feng to work off her spleen on. When Feng and Lian are angry with one
another, they both take it out on Patience. The poor girl is terribly unjustly treated.
Don’t you go taking sides against her as well!’
‘Oh well, that’s all right;’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I must say, she never struck me as
a wily seductress. In that case, of course, I’m sorry for the poor child—bearing the
brunt of it all when she is the innocent party.’
She called Amber to her.
‘Amber, I want you to take a message to Patience for me. Tell her—and I want you
to make it quite clear that the mes?sage comes from me personally—that I know she
has been unjustly treated and I shall make her mistress apologize to her tomorrow.
Only tell her not to make a fuss about it today, because it is her mistress’s birthday.’
*

Patience was at this time in Prospect Garden, whither she had been carried off at the
earliest opportunity by Li Wan and where, as soon as they were indoors, she had
collapse in a sobbing heap, resisting all attempts at lifting her. Bao-chai tried
reasoning with her.
‘Come, Patience, you are an intelligent girl. Think how well your mistress treats you
normally. Just because she’s got a bit drunk today and taken it out on you—why, it
shows how close you are to each other! You wouldn’t want her to take it out on
anyone else, would you? Everyone else is laughing at her for being such a drunken
silly. If you alone insist on—taking it so tragically, it will begin to look as if your
reputation for good sense was undeserved.’
Just then Amber came in with the message from Grand?mother Jia, and Patience,
conscious of the aura of prestige it gave her, began gradually to perk up a bit. She
remained in the Garden, however, and made no attempt to return to her mistress.
After she had sat with Patience and rested for a while, Li Wan, together with Bao-chai
and the rest of the girls, went back to see Grandmother Jia and Xi-feng, whereupon
Bao-yu invited Patience over to Green Delights. Aroma gave her an enthusiastic
welcome.
‘I’d like to have asked you here in the first place, but I saw that Mrs Zhu and the
young ladies were taking care of you, so I didn’t like to interfere.’
Patience’s face was smiling as she thanked her, but fell again almost immediately.
‘I can’t understand it, I really can’t. I’d done absolutely nothing to deserve such
treatment.’
‘Oh, it was a passing fit of anger,’ said Aroma. ‘I don’t suppose Mrs Lian knew what
she was doing. Look how well she treats you normally.’
‘I wasn’t thinking so much of Mrs Lian,’ said Patience. ‘It’s what that hateful woman
said. Why should she want to amuse herself at my expense? And then for that stupid
master of mine to go and beat me—!’
Once more the sense of injustice overcame her and she could not restrain her tears.
‘Don’t be upset, Patience!’ said Bao-yu consolingly. ‘I offer you an apology on their
behalf’
Patience laughed.
‘It has nothing to do with you.’
‘We’re all cousins,’ said Bao-yu. ‘What one of us does concerns all the others. If
they have done you an injury, it’s up to me to apologize.’
He turned his attention to her appearance.
‘What a pity! You’ve made your new dress all damp. Aroma’s dresses are in here.
Why don’t you change into one of hers, then you can spray some samshoo on this
one and iron it? You’ll need to do your hair again as well.’
He called to the junior maids to fetch water for washing and heat a flat-iron.
Up to this moment Patience had known only by hearsay of the remarkable
understanding shown by Bao-yu in his deal?ings with girls. He had deliberately kept
away from her in the past, knowing her to be Xi-feng’s confidante and (he sup?posed)
Jia Lian’s cherished concubine. It had indeed been a source of frequent regret to him
that he had been unable to show her how much he admired her. Seeing him like this
for the first time, Patience reflected on the truth of what she bad heard.
‘He really has thought of everything,’ she told herself, as she watched Aroma open
up a large chest—specially for her and select two scarcely worn garments from it for
her to change into. Then, since the water had already arrived, she took off her own
dress and skirt and quickly washed her face. Bao-yu, who stood by smiling while she
washed, now urged her to put on some make-up.
‘If you don’t, it will look as if you are sulking,’ he said ‘After all, it is Feng’s birthday,
and Grandma did specially send someone to cheer you up.’
Inwardly acknowledging the reasonableness of this advice, Patience looked round her
for some powder, but could not see any, whereupon Bao-yu darted over to the
dressing-table and removed the lid from a box of Early Ming blue-and-white
porcelain in which reposed the head of a white day my with five compact, stick like
buds on either side of the stem. Pinch?ing off one of these novel powder-containers,
he handed it to Patience.
‘There you are. This isn’t ceruse, it’s a powder made by crushing the seeds of
garden-jalap and mixing them with per?fume.’
Patience emptied the contents of the tiny phial on to her palm. All the qualities
required by the most expert perfumers were there: lightness, whiteness with just the
faintest tinge of rosiness, and fragrance. It spread smoothly and cleanly on the skin,
imparting to it a soft bloom -that was quite unlike the harsh and somewhat livid
whiteness associated with lead-based powders.
Then the rouge, too, was different—not in the usual sheets or tissues, but a tiny
white-jade box filled with a crimson substance that looked like comfiture of roses.
‘This is made from safflower, the same as ordinary rouge,’ Bao-yu explained to her,
‘only the stuff they sell in the shops is impure and its colour is inferior. This is made
by squeezing the juice from the best quality safflower, carefully extracting all the
impurities, mixing it with rose water, and then further purifying it by distillation. It’s
so concentrated that you need only a dab of it on the end of a hairpin to do your lips
with and still have enough left over to dilute with water in the palms of your hands
for using on your cheeks.’
Following his directions, Patience found that her com?plexion had acquired a radiant
freshness that she had never seen in it before. At the same time her whole face
seemed to be bathed in the most delectable perfume.
Using a pair of bamboo scissors, Bao-yu now cut the twin blossoms from the stem of
an autumn-flowering orchid that was growing in a pot and stuck them in Patience’s
hair.
At that very moment a maid arrived summoning her back to Li Wan’s place and she
had to leave him in a hurry.
Never before had Bao-yu been able to have Patience actually with him so that he
could do things for her. She was such a superior sort of girl, so handsome, so
intelligent, so different from the average run of common, insensitive creatures. His
previous inability to serve her had been a source of deep regret.
Today was—or would have been if -she had lived—Golden’s birthday, and for this
reason be had been feeling miserable since early morning. The row which bad broken
out later in the day between Xi-feng and Jia Lian had proved a godsend. It had at last
given him an opportunity of showing Patience something of what he felt for her. This
was an unlooked-for happiness he might otherwise have waited a lifetime for in vain.
He stretched himself out on his bed in a pleasurable glow of satisfaction.
These pleasant feelings were soon marred by the reflection that a coarse sensualist
like Jia Lian who never considered anything but his own pleasure would certainly
know nothing about the scientific preparation of cosmetics. He thought of Patience
serving that precious couple, alone in the world without parents or brothers and
sisters to defend her, some?how contriving to steer an even course between Jia Lian’s
boorishness on the one hand and Xi-feng’s vindictiveness on the other, yet today, in
spite of all her efforts, falling a victim to their cruelty. Truly her lot was an unhappy
one -mote unhappy even than Dai-yu’s!
At this point in his reflections he became so upset that he began to shed tears, not
bothering on this occasion to restrain them, because Aroma was not there to
disapprove. Getting up from his bed, he went over to inspect Patience’s dress. The
samshoo that had been sprayed on it was now neatly dry. He picked up the iron,
ironed the dress for her, and neatly folded it. Then he noticed that she had left her
handkerchief behind. As it was still marked with tear-stains, he washed it out in the
water she had used for her face and hung it up to dry. Feeling a strange sensation in
which sadness and happiness commingled, he mused for some minutes in silence
before going over to Sweet-rice Village to join the others. He remained there a long
while talking. The lamps had already been lit when he returned.

*

As Patience spent that night at Li Wan’s place and Xi-feng slept with Grandmother Jia,
Jia Lian returned to his room in the evening to find it gloomy and deserted. Not
caring to call for anyone, however, he managed for himself as hest he could and
spent the night there alone. On waking next morning he felt nothing but revulsion
and remorse when he remembered what had happened. His mother, Lady Xing, still
worrying about the drunken exhibition he had made of himself the day before, came
hurrying over first thing to urge him to go with her to see Grandmother Jia. This,
despite the most acute feelings of shame and embarrassment, he now had to do.
‘Well?’ the old lady asked him, when he knelt before her.
‘I had too much to drink yesterday, Grandmother, and I’m afraid I broke in on you
and made a scene. I’ve come here now to apologize.’
Grandmother Jia snorted.
‘Disgusting wretch! If you must go filling yourself with liquor, why can’t you lie
down quietly and sleep it off like a good, sensible creature? Fancy knocking your own
wife about! Feng can normally hold her own against anyone—she’s a regular little
Tyrant King as a rule—but yesterday you’d reduced the poor child to a state of terror.
Suppose I hadn’t been here to protect her and you really had done her an injury,
what would you have had to say for yourself then, I wonder?’
Though smarting under the ludicrous injustice of what she had just said, Jia Lian
knew that he was in no position to argue, and humbly acknowledged his guilt.
‘I should have thought that a couple of beauties like Feng and Patience would have
been enough for you,’ she went on. ‘Why you should need to be forever sniffing after
other skirts and bringing all this disgusting rag-tag and bob-tail back to your own
room, I just do not understand. Fancy beating your own wife and your chamber-wife
for a creature like that! And you a gentleman and member of a distinguished family!
You ought to be thoroughly ashamed of yourself. if you have any consideration for my
feelings at all, you’ll get up off the floor now— because you are forgiven as far as I
am concerned—and you’ll apologize handsomely to that poor wife of yours and take
her back home with you. Otherwise you can just take yourself off, for I shan’t accept
your kotow!’
Jia Lian turned and looked at Xi-feng, standing at his grandmother’s side. She was
wearing none of her finery today, her eyes were swollen with weeping, and her face,
pinched and yellow without its make-up, was pathetic and somehow more appealing
than usual.
‘I suppose I’d better apologize,’ .he thought. ‘It will help to patch things up between
us; and it will please the old lady.’
Having so resolved, he looked up at Grandmother Jia with a smile.
‘If that’s what you want, Grandmother, I daren’t disobey you. But it’s going to make
her even more willful than before.’
‘Nonsense I’ said Grandmother Jia, though not ill-humoredly. ‘I know for a fact that
she is a model of wifely behaviour. I am sure she would be quite incapable of
deliber?ately giving offence. If she does ever give you any trouble, I shall see to it
myself that she submits to your authority.’
Jia Lian got to his feet then, and clasping his hands in front of him, made a low bow
to his wife.
‘It was all my fault, Mrs Lian. Please forgive me.’
This was said in so droll a manner that everyone burst out laughing.
‘Now you’re not to be angry any more, Feng,’ said Grand?mother Jia, ‘or I shall be
angry with you!’
She ordered someone to fetch Patience, and told Jia Lian and Xi-feng that she would
now expect them to make it up with her.
When Jia Lian saw Patience, he was even more ready to pocket his pride for her than
he had been for Xi-feng.

                      There’s no wife like a chamber-wife

as the saying goes, and before anyone else could say a word, he had bounded up to
her and began apologizing.
‘You were very badly treated yesterday, Patience. It was all my fault. It was because
of me that Mrs Lian was so beastly to you. Apart from offering you my own apology,
I’d like to apologize on her behalf as well.’
He clasped his hands again and bowed, once more provok?ing Grandmother Jia to
laughter. This time Xi-feng laughed, too.
Grandmother Jia told Xi-feng that it was now her turn; but before she could do
anything, Patience rushed up to her, threw herself at her feet and kotowed.
‘I made you angry on your birthday, madam. I shall never forgive myself.’
Xi-feng was already feeling remorseful that in her previous day’s drunkenness she
had so far forgotten herself as to humiliate Patience, in spite of all they had always
meant to each other, because of a mere chance-heard remark. Seeing her now so
generous and so lacking in resentment, she was both ashamed and deeply touched.
There were tears on her cheeks as she bent down and raised the girl to her feet.
‘In all the years I’ve served you,’ said Patience, ‘you’ve never laid so much as a
finger on me before. I bear you ‘no grudge for striking me yesterday, madam. It was
all that wicked woman’s doing. I don’t blame you in the least for losing your temper.’
She, too, was crying while she said this.
‘See the three of them back to their room now,’ said Grandmother Jia to her
women. ‘And if you hear another’ word about this, let me know straight away who
said it. I don’t care who it is, I shall take a stick to them myself!’
The three of them now kotowed to Grandmother Jia, to Lady Xing and to Lady Wang;
then the old nannies, bidden once mote to escort them, stepped forward with cries
of obedience and conducted them back to their room.
As soon as the three of them were alone together, Xi-feng started on Jia Lian.
‘Am I really such a hell-cat? Are you really so terribly hen?pecked? When that
woman wished me dead, you agreed with her. Surely I can’t be all that bad? Surely I
must have some good days, even if it’s only one in a thousand? You’ve made it seem
as if I’m worse even than that worthless whore. How can I have the face to go on
living now?’
She began to cry again.
‘Aren’t you satisfied yet?’ said Jia Lian. ‘Just think a bit: who was most to blame
yesterday? Yet today I was the one who had to kneel down in front of everyone and
apologize. You’ve come out of this pretty well. So what are you yammering at me
now for? Do you want me to kneel down again? Here? It doesn’t do to be too greedy,
you know.’
Xi-feng, unable to think of a reply to this, fell silent. Patience giggled.
‘There, it’s all over!’ said Jia Lian, laughing himself. ‘It’s no good. I just can’t help
myself.’
Just then a woman came to the door to report.
‘Bao Er’s wife has hanged herself.’
Jia Lian and Xi-feng were both profoundly shocked; but the look of fear on Xi-feng’s
face was of only momentary duration.
‘Well,’ she said harshly, ‘what of it? Why make such a fuss about it?’
Shortly after this Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife came in and spoke to Xi-feng on the side.
‘Bao Er’s -wife has hanged herself. Her family are talking about taking it to court.’
Xi-feng laughed scornfully.
‘Good! I was thinking of doing the same thing myself.’
‘I’ve just been trying to talk them out of it,’ said Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife. ‘I tried
frightening them a bit to start with, then I promised them some money if they would
drop it. They seemed to be willing.’
‘I’ve got no money to give them,’ said Xi-feng, ‘and I wouldn’t give it to them if I had.
Let them go ahead and sue. I don’t want you to talk them out of it, or to try
frightening them out of it either. Just let them go ahead and sue. If they lose their
case, I shall bring a suit against them for ex morte blackmail!’
As she stood there in some perplexity to know what to do, Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife noticed
that Jia Lian was signaling to her with his eyes. She understood his meaning and went
off to wait for him outside.
Jia Lian followed soon after.
‘I’m just going out to have a look—see what’s going on,’ he said on his way out.
‘You’re not to give them any money I’ Xi-feng shouted after him.
Jia Lian went straight off to discuss the matter with Lin Zhi-xiao himself. As a result of
their discussion, someone was sent to haggle -with the family and promise whatever
seemed necessary, and the family eventually agreed to keep quiet in return for a
payment of two hundred taels ‘towards funeral expenses’. Terrified that they might
change their minds, Jia Lian sent someone to talk to the local magistrate and invited
the police inspector and two or three of the constables in to ‘help with the funeral’.
Seeing the way things were, the family now dared not pursue the matter any further
even if they wanted to, and were obliged to digest in silence whatever they might
feel of grief or anger.
Jia Lian told Lin Zhi-xiao to account for the two hundred taels by adding a bit here
and a bit there on to various items in the Current Expenses account. He also slipped
Bao Er some money of his own and consoled him with a promise that he would pick a
good wife for him at the earliest opportunity to replace the one he had just lost.
Flattered by all the attention he was receiving and grateful for the money, Bao Er was
only too willing to do as he was told and continued to serve Jia Lian with no less
devotion than before. But that is no part of our story.
Whatever internal uneasiness Xi-feng may have felt about these developments,
outwardly she affected complete in?difference. Finding herself alone with Patience
when Jia Lian had gone, she smilingly inquired after her injuries.
I was terribly drunk yesterday,’ she said. ‘I hope you won’t hold it against me, what I
did then. Where did I hit you? Let me have a look.’
‘You didn’t hit me very hard,’ said Patience.
Just at that moment they were interrupted by an announcement from outside.
‘Mrs Zhu and the young ladies are here.’
If you want to know what they had come for, you will have to read the following
chapter.

CHAPTER.45

Sisterly understanding finds expression in words of
sisterly frankness
And autumnal pluviousness is celebrated in verses of
autumnal melancholy



As we were saying at the end of the last chapter, Xi-feng had just begun expressing
her concern for Patience when Li Wan and the cousins walked in. She broke off and
invited them to be seated, and Patience went round and served them all with tea.
‘What a crowd!’ said Xi-feng. ‘Anyone would think I’d sent out an invitation for
something I’
‘There are two things we wanted to see you about,’ said Tan-chun. ‘One is my affair;
the other concerns Xi-chun but also includes instructions from Grandmother.’
‘They must be very important things for a turn-out like this,’ said Xi-feng.
‘We started a poetry club recently,’ said Tan-chun, ‘and the very first time we had a
regular meeting, somebody didn’t turn up. As the rest of us are too soft to apply the
rules our?selves, we want to invite you, as someone we could trust to apply them for
us with iron impartiality, to be our Disciplinary Officer. That’s the first thing. The
second thing concerns this painting of the Garden that Xi-chun has been asked to do.
There are all sorts of things she’ll need for it that she hasn’t got. We spoke to
Grandmother about it and she said that there might still be some things that would
do in the downstairs store-room at the back. She said we ought to have a look, and if
there are, we can use them. Otherwise, anything we haven’t got ourselves we should
send outside for and buy.’
‘I know nothing about poetry,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I couldn’t compose a poem to save my
life. I could come along to eat and drink with you if you like.’
‘You wouldn’t have to compose poems,’ said Tan-chum ‘That’s not what we want
you for. All you have to do is keep an eye on the rest of us, and if you find anyone
slacking or playing truant, decide how they ought to be punished.’
‘Don’t try to fool me,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ve already guessed. It’s not iron impartiality
you’re after, it’s financial backing. If you’ve got a club, you’re sure to have some
arrangement for taking it in turns to pay the bill, and as you’re short of money,
you’ve thought of this as a means of roping me in so that you can get some out of me.
That’s the real reason for your invita?tion, isn’t it?’
The others laughed.
‘Too bad! You’ve guessed.’
‘You’re like the original Crystal Man, Feng,’ said Li Wan.

                 ‘A heart of crystal in a body of glass.
You can see through everything!’
‘Fancy!’ said Xi-feng, mockingly. ‘The respected elder sister-in-law! The one who’s
put in charge of these young ladies to guide their studies and teach them needlework
and good manners! You encourage them to start a poetry dub, but as soon as the
question of money arises (and incidentally, how much money is involved?—it can’t
surely be very much), you’re not interested: it has nothing to do with you! Now, you
have a monthly allowance of ten taels. Excluding Grand?mother and Aunt Wang -
and they are, after all, ladies of rank and title—that’s twice as much as any of the rest
of us gets. Yet Grandma and Auntie go on about how poor you are: “poor young
widow I” “no means of her own!,’ Oh yes, and be-cause you’ve got a son, you get
another ten taels a month on top of that, which actually makes you equal with
Grandma and Auntie Wang. And you’ve got your land in the Garden, the best plot
there. It’s down in the tithe-book for the highest tithing. And you haven’t got a big
establishment. I doubt there are ten of you there altogether, counting you and Lan
and all the servants, so your outgoings can’t come to very much. And in any case
your food and clothing is all found out of common funds. If one were to add it all up
together, I think your real income must be somewhere in the region of four or five
hundred taels a year. Even if you were to spend one or two hundred a year out of
that on amusements for the girls like this poetry thing, it wouldn’t be for many years.
Another year or two from now and they’ll all be getting mar?ried. And it’s not as if
you were saving up for their dowries, either. That’s hardly likely to be your
responsibility. No, you’re frightened of spending that money of yours, that’s why
you’ve set these girls on to me. I’m supposed to go along like an innocent and eat
and drink myself silly so that next day I can be made to foot the bill. That’s your little
game, isn’t it?’
‘Listen to her, all of you!’ said Li Wan, laughing. ‘I make a single, inoffensive remark
to her, and in return I get this cart-load of ill-bred’ abuse! Really, Feng, what a
mercenary creature you are! You’re just like one of those muddy-legged wretches
who stand haggling in the market-place with a little abacus up one sleeve to do their
calculations on. It’s a good job you were born a girl and brought up in an educated,
upper-class family and that you married into a family of the same sort. If you’d been
born a boy and your family had been poor and un?educated people, I dread to think
what sort of a calculating monster you would have grown up into! Everyone in the
world has to become the object of your calculations. Yester?day it was Patience’s
turn. It’s a wonder you have arms to strike her with, for I’m sure it was a dog’s
stomach you poured all that wine into. None but a dog would have turned on
Patience the way you did. I tell you, I was so angry, I felt like coming straight over and
giving you a piece of my mind. Then I thought it over for a bit and decided not to.
After all, it was your birthday, and as we know, “every dog must have his day”. Also I
was afraid that if I made a fuss I might upset Grandmother. And because I didn’t have
it out with you yesterday, I was still feeling angry about it when I came here to see
you just now. Yet you have the gall to start on me—you who aren’t worthy to pick up
Patience’s shoes! You ought to change places, you two. I’m sure Patience would make
the better mistress.’

It made the girls laugh to hear Li Wan speaking with such unaccustomed heat.
‘Oh, now I understand!’ said Xi-feng, joining in their laughter. ‘It wasn’t about
poetry or painting that you came to see me: it was revenge for Patience you were
after. I didn’t realize that she had so powerful a protector. Now that I do, I shall never
dare to strike her again—not if all the devils in hell are tugging at my elbow! Here,
Patience! Miss Patience! Let me apologize to you in front of Mrs Zhu and the young
ladies. I “did evil in my cups”. Please forgive me.’
The others laughed.
‘There you are!’ said Li Wan to Patience. ‘I told you I’d stick up for you, didn’t I?’
‘It’s all very well for you ladies to joke about it,’ said Patience, ‘but you make me
feel very. uncomfortable.’
‘You’ve no cause to feel uncomfortable,’ said Li Wan. ‘I’ll look after you. You just get
that key and tell your mistress to unlock the store-room and find those things for us.’
‘My dear good Wan, please take these girls back to the Garden,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ve
got the rice accounts to go over; I’ve got to see Lady Xing about something (1 don’t
know what, but she’s just sent over to say that she wants me); and I’ve got the New
Year’s clothes to see about. I have to find out what everyone wants and get the
orders placed—’
‘I don’t care in the least about these things,’ said Li Wan airily. ‘You just settle my
business first so that I can go back home and rest and not have these girls pestering
me any more.’
‘Give me a little time!’ said Xi-feng pleadingly. ‘You’re so considerate towards me as
a rule; I don’t know why I’m so Out of favour with you today. I suppose it must be
because of Patience. Often in the past you’ve said to me, “Now I know how busy you
are, Feng, but your health is important: you ought to find means somehow or other
of taking a rest.” That’s what you would normally say in a situation like this; but today
you seem more intent on driving me into an early grave! Incidentally, you may not
think it matters very much if the arrangements for other people’s winter clothing get
put off, but what about the clothing for the girls? Strictly speak?ing that’s your
responsibility. Don’t you think Grandmother would feel that you were taking
non-interference just a little far if she discovered that the girls were going without
winter clothes simply for want of a word from you? You know, of course, that I would
rather get into trouble myself than involve you in trouble...’
‘Listen to her, all of you,’ said Li Wan. ‘Marvellous, isn’t it? I’d like to get hold of that
clever tongue of yours, Feng, and—! Just tell me this one thing, then: are you going
to keep an eye on our poetry club for us or aren’t you?’
‘What a question!’ said Xi-feng. ‘If I refused to join your club and spend my money
in it, I should be declaring myself in open rebellion against the Prospect Garden
Residents’ Association, and heaven help me then!—my life wouldn’t be worth living!
I shall be round first thing tomorrow to report for duty, and the first thing I shall do
will he to pay down fifty taels to be spent as and when you wish on the club’s
entertain?ment. I can t write poetry—or anything else, for that matter—and I’m a
very common, ignorant sort of person to be joining a poetry club; and as for taking
on this disciplinary business: well, whether I do or whether I don’t, I don’t suppose
there’ll be much danger of your expelling me once you’ve seen the colour of my
money.’
The others laughed.
‘I’ll open the store-room presently,’ she continued, ‘and I’ll get them to put out
anything that looks as if it might be of use for you to have a look at. If you can use it,
keep it. Anything you’re still short of after that, I’ll tell them to buy for you outside. I
can get the pongee cut for you straight away. The architect’s drawing isn’t at Lady
Wang’s, by the way; it’s at Cousin Zhen’s place. I’m telling you this to save you a
wasted journey. I can get it for you, if you like; then I can have it taken with the
pongee to Sir Zheng’s gentlemen and ask them to do the sizing for you.’
Li Wan nodded approvingly.
‘That would be very kind. If you’ll really do all that for us, we shall have nothing
more to say. Come on then, everybody I Let’s go home and see what happens. If she
doesn’t send the stuff we can come back and deal with her later.’
She began to leave the room as she said this, the cousins following in her wake.
‘I know of only one person who could have stirred all this up,’ said Xi-feng as they
were going, ‘and that’s Bao-yu.’
The mention of his name stopped Li Wan in her tracks. She came back into the room.
‘I’d completely forgotten: it was Bao-yu that I came about in the first place. He was
the one who failed to turn up at our first meeting. We’re all too soft to know what to
do with him. How do you think we ought to punish him?’
Xi-feng thought for a bit.
‘The only thing I can suggest is that you should make him go round to each of your
apartments in turn and sweep the floors for you.
‘Yes, yes,’ said the others, laughing. ‘The very thing!’
They were just about to leave for the second time when Lai Da’s mother, old Mrs Lai,
came in, leaning on the shoulder of a little maid. Xi-feng and the rest rose to greet
her. They begged her to be seated and offered her their congratulations. The old
woman sat down on the edge of the kang and smiled round at them with pleasure.
‘The way I see it, since you are our employers, our good fortune is really yours. If it
weren’t for your family, how would the likes of us ever have come by a piece of good
fortune like this in the first place? Yesterday when you sent young Sun?shine round
with those presents, my grandson “kotowed up?wards”. in the doorway to show his
gratitude.’
‘When will he be leaving to take up his post?’ said Li Wan. Old Mrs Lai sighed, as
though the thought made her melan?choly.
‘Oh, I don’t concern myself with their affairs. I just let them get on with it. When he
came round to me to kotow the other day, I didn’t have a good word for him. I said to
him, “Young man, don’t tell me you’re a mandarin now, because it’s just plain
ridiculous. Thirty years it is since you were born,” I said, “and all that time, in actual
fact, you’ve :been a bondservant. Yet through the kindness of our Masters you were
set apart from the moment you came out of your mother’s womb. Thanks to the
Masters and your parents,” I said, “you were taught to read and write like a
gentleman’s son and fussed over by a parcel of maids and nannies and wet-nurses as
if you was some sort of young phoenix. I doubt you know how the word
‘bondservant’ is written. You’ve known nothing but soft living since you were born,” I
said. “You don’t know the bitterness your father and your grandfather had to go
through. You don’t appreciate the generations of hardship that went into the making
of a fine gentleman like you. And the money they spent on you,” I said’ “nursing you
through all the fevers and calamities of youth (for you were a sickly, ailing child): it
would have been enough to have made you anew out of silver Then, when you were
twenty, the Master, out of the kindness of his heart, undertook to buy you a place in
the Service, so that your future would be assured. Think how many freeborn
members of the clan go hungry,” I said, “yet be did this fox you, that was born a slave.
Such great fortune should make you fearful. And now, after ten years of fooling
around, you’ve talked the Master—by what jiggery-pokery I do not know -into getting
you selected for a posting. A district magistrate may not be very high in the scale,” I
said, “but the mandarin who goes to a district to be its magistrate is supposed to be
the father and mother of all the people who live there. So mind you don’t go getting
above yourself,” I said. “Do all in your power to show that you are worthy of the trust.
And always let the Master see how much you appreciate what he has done for you.
Otherwise Heaven will surely cast you off.’
Li Wan and Xi-feng both laughed.
‘You worry too much, Mrs Lai,’ said Xi-feng. ‘He’s all right. It’s true we don’t see
much of him nowadays. He used to come in once in a while, but these last few years
all we’ve seen of him has been his visiting-card at New Years and birthdays. He did
come in the other day, however, to kotow to Her Old Ladyship and Lady Wang. We
saw him in Her Old Ladyship’s courtyard, dressed in his new uniform. He looked very
imposing. A little bit fatter than he used to be. You ought to be happy now that he’s a
mandarin, not making yourself miserable with all this worrying about him. Even if he
doesn’t behave himself, I should leave his parents to do the worrying. All you have to
do now is sit back and enjoy your-self. If ever you’re at a loose end, you can always
jump in your chair and have yourself carried round here for a game of cards and a
chat with Her Old Ladyship. I’m sure no one here would dream of making you feel
uncomfortable. After all, you’ve got upstairs and downstairs and halls and
reception-rooms back home just the same as we have. You’re as good as any lady in
the land now, you know. I’m sure you will be respected as such.’
Mrs Lai hurriedly rose to her feet as Patience came up to pour tea for her.
‘You shouldn’t do that, miss. You should let one of the younger ones do it. ’Tain’t
right you should pour for me.’
Sitting down again she continued to hold forth between sips.
‘You don’t know that boy, Mrs Lian. He’s like all young people: you have to be strict
with them all the time. Even then if you’re not careful they’ll somehow find a way to
raise the devil and grieve their parents’ hearts. This young chap of ours now: those
that know him realize it’s just the mischief coming out, but those who don’t are liable
to think that he’s taking advantage of the fact that he’s got more money and
influence than other people to throw his weight about; and that reflects badly on the
Master’s reputation as well. Oh, I get so angry about it sometimes, I don’t know what
to do with myself. I have to call his Dad in and give him a good talking-to and then I
feels a bit better. I hope you won’t mind my saying this’—she pointed a finger at
Bao-yu - ‘but I wouldn’t have thought that your father was strict enough with you.
Look at the way Her Old Ladyship was out in front the moment he started when he
gave you that beating a while ago. You should have seen the way your grandfather
used to lay into him when he was a lad. And your father wasn’t the scapegrace that
you are, either. Then there was your father’s elder brother, Master She. Now he was
mischievous—though even so, he didn’t turn the whole household upsy-downsy the
way you seem to. He was always getting beaten. Oh, and the way your Cousin
Zhen’s grandfather over at the Ning-guo used to lay into his son! Oh, he had a fiery
temper! Once it was up—well, you’d never have thought it was his son he was
beating. Looked more like he was torturing a bandit. From what I’ve seen and beard, I
should imagine that the way your Cousin Zhen at the Ning-guo disciplines his son is in
his grandfather’s tradition. Only trouble is, he’s a bit too erratic. Can’t control himself,
that’s his trouble. I don’t blame the young ones for not respecting him. If you’re
sensible, young man, you’ll be glad to hear me say this; otherwise, though you may
be too polite to say so, I expect you’ll think I’m an interfering old woman.’
Just then Lai Da’s wife came in, followed almost im?mediately by the wives of Zhou
Rui and Zhang Cai. The latter two had come to report to Xi-feng on various domestic
matters. Xi-feng smilingly inquired of Lai Da’s wife whether she had come to collect
her mother-in-law.
‘Well, no, madam, not exactly,’ said Lai Da’s wife. ‘I really came to find out whether
you and the young ladies will be favouring us with your presence or not.’
‘Oh, how silly of me!’ said old Mrs Lai when she heard this. ‘Here have I been
talking a load of stale old sesame and all the time forgetting the one thing I came
here to ask you about! On account of our young chap’s posting, all our friends and
relations want to get together and celebrate, so we thought we’d better have a
reception. Well, the way I saw it, if we only held it for one day, it would mean inviting
some people and leaving out others, and that wouldn’t seem right. So I thought
about it for a bit, and I thought to myself, well, it’s thanks to the Masters that this
great honour has come our way, so we must do what we can to show our
appreciation. Even if it means spending every penny we’ve got, we ought to be glad
to do it. So I told the boy’s father to arrange a reception for three days running. On
the first day we’ll have some tables and a stage in our little bit of garden at the back
to entertain Her Old Ladyship and Their Ladyships and your good selves and the
young ladies, and some more tables and a stage with another lot of players in the
reception room at the front where we can entertain the gentlemen. The second day
will be a reception for relations and friends of the family, and the third day will be for
colleagues on the staffs of the two mansions. I do hope you will honour us with a
visit. It will be the high?light of our celebrations.’
Li Wan and Xi-feng asked her when the reception would be, assuring her that they
fully intended to come.
‘I’m sure Lady Jia would love to come too,’ they said, ‘but I wouldn’t bank on her
being able to.’
‘The date we’ve chosen is the fourteenth,’ said Lai Da’s wife hurriedly, before her
mother-in-law had a chance to get under way again. ‘We do hope you’ll come, for
Mother’s sake.’
‘I can’t answer for the others,’ said Xi-feng amiably, ‘but I shall definitely be coming.
I’d better warn you, though: I haven’t got any present to bring, and you mustn’t
expect me to offer largesse—I wouldn’t know how to go about it. You mustn’t laugh
if I just eat up and go.’
‘Get along with you, madam!’ said Lai Da’s wife, laughing. ‘If you feel like bringing a
largesse, twenty or thirty thousand taels would do very nicely!’
Old Mrs Lai laughed.
‘I been to see Her Old Ladyship already and she says she’ll come. Reckon I ought to
feel pretty pleased with myself.’
After further exhortations to attend the party and various other admonishments, the
old woman was at last getting up to go when her eye chanced to fall on Zhou Rui’s
wife and she seemed to remember something.
‘There’s something else I wanted to ask you about, Mrs Lian. What’s all this about
Zhou’s boy being dismissed? What did he do wrong?’
‘Ah yes, I’ve been meaning to speak to your daughter-in-?law about it,’ said Xi-feng,
‘but there were so many other things to think about that they drove it from my mind.
Lai, dear,’—she turned to Lai Da’s wife—‘when you get back, will you tell your
husband that neither of our households will be employing Zhou Rui’s son any longer
and that he is to send him packing?’
Lai Da’s wife could only agree, but the unhappy mother fell on her knees in
supplication.
‘What did he do?’ old Mrs Lai repeated. ‘Tell me what he did, and I’ll be judge for
you.’
‘Yesterday on my birthday,’ said Xi-feng, ‘before the rest of us had even started
drinking, he was already drunk, and when my grandmother sent her women round
with some presents, instead of going out and being nice to them, he sat where he
was swearing at everybody and made no attempt to receive the presents or take
them inside. Eventually the two women came in by themselves and he did at last go
with a couple of the pages to take in what they had brought. But though the pages
made no trouble, this young Zhou dropped the box he was carrying and scattered
wheat-cakes all over the courtyard. After the women had gone, I sent Sunshine out to
give him a talking-to, but it ended up with him shouting and swearing at Sunshine.
Faced with a young hooligan like that who is so utterly and completely uncontrollable,
I don’t see that one has any choice but to dismiss him.’
‘Is that all it was?’ said Grannie Lai. ‘And I was thinking it must have been
something serious! Take my advice, Mrs Lian. If that boy’s done wrong, beat him and
curse him and tell him to mend his ways, but dismiss him?—no, that would never do.
He’s not like one of your house-born servants. The Zhous came with Her Ladyship
from her old home when she was married. If you insist on dismissing him, it will look
like an affront to Her Ladyship. Give him a few whacks to learn him and tell him not
to do it again; but keep him on, whatever you do. If you won’t do it for his ma’s sake,
do it for Her Lady?ship’s.’
Xi-feng turned to Lai Da’s wife.
‘Very well then. Let him be called for tomorrow and given forty strokes with the
heavy bamboo. And tell him he’s not to drink any more.’
Lai Da’s wife said she would see that done. After that Zhou Rui’s wife kotowed to
Xi-feng in gratitude. She wanted to kotow to Mrs Lai as well, but the old woman
reached forward and prevented her. The four women then left, and Li Wan and the
girls went back into the Garden.
Towards evening Xi-feng sent someone to the store-room, as promised, to hunt out
any old painting gear that had been stored there and take it round for Bao-chai and
the others to look over. On doing so the girls found only about half the things they
wanted, and made a list of the other half which they gave to Xi-feng to have bought.
But these are matters about which it is not necessary to go into detail.
Suffice it to say that the freshly-sized pongee arrived back from outside in due course
together with a rough draft of the projected painting, and that Bao-yu began to
spend a part of each. day at Xi-chun’s place helping her. Tan-chun, Li Wan, Ying-chun
and Bao-chai developed the habit of dropping into sit with them while they worked,
partly to watch the painting and partly because it made a convenient rendezvous.
Reminded by the first nip in the air that the hours of dark?ness were gradually
lengthening, Bao-chai went round for a long consultation with her mother from
which she came away with quantities of extra sewing to occupy herself with in the
evenings; but since, when making her morning and evening calls on Lady Wang and
Grandmother Jia, she would often, if they seemed desirous of her company, spend a
considerable while sitting and talking with them, and since she was also in the habit
of dropping in from time to time to gossip with one or another of her cousins in the
Garden, she had very little leisure for sewing in the daytime and as a consequence
was invariably plying her needle under the lamp until eleven or twelve o’clock at
night.

*

As for Dai-yu, twice every year, following the spring and autumn equinoxes, she
suffered from a recurrence of her old sickness. This autumn the repeated junketings
occasioned by Grandmother Jia’s enthusiastic excursions into the Garden had drained
her of energy. Recently she had begun coughing again; and as this year it seemed to
be considerably worse than usual, she had stopped going out altogether and stayed
at home nursing herself in her room. Sometimes when she was feeling depressed she
would long for a visit from one of the girls and the distraction of someone to talk to.
But when Bao-chai or one of the others did in fact look in to ask how she was, she
would grow fidgety after only a few sentences had been exchanged between them
and begin to wish that they would go. The others realized that it was being ill that
made her like this; and knowing from past experience how hyper?sensitive she was,
they were never sharp with her, even if she was somewhat remiss as a hostess and
often lacking in courtesy.
Once when Bao-chai called in to see her, the nature of her illness became the subject
of their conversation.
‘I suppose the doctors in attendance on this family aren’t too bad as doctors go,’
said Bao-chai, ‘but the medicines they prescribe for you don’t seem to make you any
better. Don’t you think it’s time they called in someone really first-rate who could
cure this sickness once and for all? Every year all through the spring and summer you
have this trouble; yet you’re not an old lady, and you’re not a little girl any longer. You
can’t go on in this way indefinitely.’
‘It’s no good,’ said Dai-yu. ‘This illness will never go away completely. Look what I’m
like ordinarily, even when I’m not ill.’
Bao-chai nodded.
‘Exactly I You know the old saying: “He that eats shall live”? What you ordinarily eat,
when you’re not ill, doesn’t seem to nourish you or build up your resistance. That’s
one of your troubles.’
Dai-yu sighed.

         ‘Life and death are as Heaven decrees; and rank
         and riches are as Heaven bestows them.

These things are not in human power to command. I seem to be worse this year than
I have been in previous years.’
She coughed several times while she was saying this.
‘I was looking the other day it that prescription of yours,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I should
have said myself that there was too much cinnamon and ginseng in it. I know they
are supposed to build you up; but you don’t want to go overheating yourself. If you
ask me, I think the first, most important thing to do is to calm your liver and
strengthen your stomach a bit. If you could reduce the inflamed, over-active state of
your liver so that it was no longer harming the earthy humour of your spleen, your
stomach would begin functioning normally again and then the food you ate could
begin to nourish you properly. First thing every morning you ought to take an ounce
of the best quality bird’s nest and five drams of sugar-candy and heat them up in a
silver skillet until they make a sort of syrup. If you were to take that regularly, it
would do you more good than medicine. There’s nothing like it for building you up if
you have low vitality.’
Dai-yu sighed again.
‘You’re such a kind person,’ she said, ‘but I’ve got such a suspicious nature that in
the past I always suspected that your kindness was a cloak for something and
rejected it. It wasn’t until the other day, when you told me off for reading for?bidden
books and offered me all that good advice, that I ever felt really grateful to you. I
realized then that I had all along been wrong about you— right from the very start. I
suddenly realized: I’m fifteen this year and have no brothers or sisters: ever since my
m6ther died there has been no one—literally no one - who has ever spoken to me in
that sort of way. I’m not surprised Cousin Yun speaks so highly of you. I used to hate
it when I heard her praise your kindness, but since experienc?ing it myself, I know
what she means. If it had been you who’d said those things in the drinking game, I
should have been quite merciless. I should never have kept quiet about it at the time
and gently remonstrated about it later, when we were alone together, as you did I
knew from that that I had been wrong about you, and that you must really care for
me. If my eyes hadn’t been opened for me then, I should never be talking to you like
this today.
‘Now about this bird’s nest syrup you want me to take. I know bird’s nest is fairly
easy to come by, but this illness of mine is something I suffer from every year
because of my weak constitution. There’s nothing particularly serious about it, it’s
just something that I always get. Yet already everyone’s put to a huge amount of
inconvenience because of it, fetching doctors, brewing medicines, buying ginseng for
me and Saigon cinnamon. If I now come up with some fancy new idea like asking to
have bird’s nest syrup made for me every day, then even though Grandmother and
Aunt Wang and Cousin Feng may not say anything, the old nannies and maids on the
staff are sure to resent the extra work. Cousin Bao and Cousin Feng are Grandma’s
favourites, yet you should see the looks these people give them sometimes and you
should hear the things they say about them behind their backs! So you can imagine
what they must be like about me. I’m not even a proper member of the family: I’m
just a refugee, with no family of my own, living here as a hanger-on. That in itself is
enough to make them resent me. It’s difficult enough for? me as it is, without
deliberately thinking up new ways to make them hate me.’
‘I’m just as much an outsider as you are,’ said Bao-chai.
‘There’s no comparison between us;’ said Dai-yu. ‘You’ve got your mother and your
brother for a start. You’ve got property and businesses. You’ve still got land and a
home of your own back in Nanking. It’s true that as marriage-relations they allow you
to live here free of charge, but you provide everything for yourselves apart from the
accommodation. You don’t cost them a penny. And anytime you feel like it, you can
just get up and go. I’ve got nothing at all of my own, absolutely nothing. Yet
everything they give me—food. cloth?ing, pocket-money, even the flowers and trees
in my garden -are the same as they give their own gifts. Can you wonder that the
servants are so resentful ?’
‘Your being here only means one more dowry for them to find,’ said Bao-chai.
‘Surely so small an extra expense as that is hardly going to bother them?’
Dai-yu coloured.
‘I’ve been telling you my troubles because I thought you really cared, but you turn
them into a joke.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Bao-chai, smiling. ‘But it’s true, all the same. However, don’t you
worry: as long as I’m here, I promise to do my best to make it easier for you. If you
will promise always to let me know when anything is bothering you, I will promise to
deal with it if it is in my power to do so. I have a brother, it’s true; but you know as
well as I do what he’s like. It’s really only in having a mother that I can count myself a
bit luckier than you. In other respects we have enough in com?mon to think of
ourselves as fellow-sufferers. If you can see this—as with your intelligence I am sure
you must—you have no cause to go echoing Si-ma Niu’s complaint: “All men have
brothers, only I have none.’ Now, you have suggested that “the less trouble the
better” ought to be your motto here, and I take your point. I shall have a word with
Mother next time I see her about this. I’ll be surprised if we haven’t got some bird’s
nest of our own at home. If we have, I shall tell them to send you a few ounces, so
that you can get your own maids to prepare it for you every morning. That way will
be handier for you and will also avoid the risk of any alarms and excursions with the
staff.’
Dai-yu smiled at her gratefully.
It may be only a little thing, but it is very kind indeed of you to have thought of it.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Bao-chai. ‘It’s not worth speaking of. I’m only afraid that by
spending so much time with other people I may have been neglecting you rather.
Well, I’d better be going now. I’m afraid I’m tiring you.’
‘Come again this evening and talk to me for a bit,’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-chai promised to do so and departed.
And at this point she departs for a little while from our narrative.

*

Left alone, Dai-yu ate a few mouthfuls of congee and then lay down on her bed.
Towards sundown a change of weather came, bringing the whisper and rustle of rain.
It was the pulsing, steady rain of autumn, so constant that you sometimes wonder if
it has stopped. The afternoon slid imperceptibly into a somber evening, blackened by
lowering rain clouds and made yet more melancholy for Dai-yu by the persistent drip
of the rain on her bamboos. Reflecting that Bao-chai would now be unable to come,
she picked up a book at random to read beneath the lamp.
It was a volume of The Lyric Miscellany consisting largely of songs of sorrow and
separation: ‘The Autumn Bride’, ‘The Grief of Parting’ and suchlike. Moved by what
she read, she was inevitably drawn to give outlet to her feelings in com?position and
had soon completed a ‘song of separation ‘of her own. As she had modelled it on
Zhang Ruo-xu’s famous poem ‘Spring River: A Night of Flowers and Moonlight’, she
decided to call it ‘Autumn Window: A Night of Wind and Rain’. This is how it went:

Autumn Window: A Night of Wind and Rain

             The autumn flowers are dead, the leaves are sere;
             Lamp-light comes soon, the nights grow long again.
             Outside my window autumn’s signs appear
             More dismal in the wind and rustling rain.

             The rustling rain came in such swift downpour
             It startled me from autumn-dream-filled sleep.
             Now, in a muse, unable to sleep more,
             I watch the candle at my bedside weep.

           The candle weeps down to its socket low,
    And my heart weeps and desolation feels.
           Yet the same wind in other courts must blow;
             The sound of rain through other windows steals.

             The wind’s chill strikes through quilt and counterpane,
             The rain drums like a mad clock in my ears,
             All night, in whispering, monotone refrain,
             Companion to my own swift-coursing tears.

             The courtyard now with mist begins to fill,
             The bamboo’s drip persists without a pause.
             When will the wind cease and the rain be still,
             That with its weeping soaks my window’s gauze?

Having read it over to herself out loud, she laid down the writing-brush and was
about to go back to bed and settle down for the night when one of her maids
announced the arrival of Master Bao’. Almost simultaneously with this
an?nouncement, Bao-yu himself burst in wearing a rain-cape and an enormous
rain-hat of woven bamboo. Dai-ya laughed at the spectacle he presented.
‘The Old Fisherman! Where have you just sprung from?’
‘How are you today?’ Bao-yu asked her anxiously. ‘Have you had your medicine?
How much have you managed to eat today?’
He was divesting himself of the rain-clothes while he asked these questions. When he
had disposed of them, he picked up the lamp from the table and, shielding it with
one hand to throw the light on her scrutinized her face. He appeared to be satisfied
with what he saw.
You’ve got a better colour today.’
Now that he had taken off the rain-clothes, Dai-yu could see what he was wearing
underneath. He had on a somewhat worn-looking tunic of red silk damask tied with a
green sash at the waist, and trousers of sprigged green silk. The ends of his trousers
were stuffed into socks extravagantly patterned with a design of flowers picked out in
gold, and there were flowers and butterflies embroidered on his satin slippers.
‘The top part of you seems to have been pretty well pro?tected against the rain,’
said Dai-yu, ‘but what about the bottom part? Still, you appear to have kept your feet
dry.’
‘This is a complete outfit I’ve been wearing,’ said Bao-yu. ‘There is a pair of
pear-wood patterns that go with it as well, but I left them outside on your verandah.’
Dai-yu looked again at the cape and rain-hat. Both were exquisitely made—quite
unlike those that are sold in the market.
‘What sort of straw is this cape made of?’ she asked him. ‘It’s so fine. I can see now
why you didn’t look like a hedge?hog in it as people usually do in these things.’
‘The whole outfit was given to me by the Prince of Bei?jing;’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s
exactly like the one he wears himself at home when it rains. If you like it, I’ll get-you
one the same. There’s nothing so very special about it really. The hat’s rather fun.
The centre part is detachable. If you want to wear it in winter when it’s snowing, you
undo this little bamboo fastener and the whole top comes out, leaving you with just
the brim. So when it snows, it can be worn by a woman just as-well as by a man. I’ll
get you a hat like this to wear in winter when it snows.’
‘I don’t want one, thank you,’ said Dai-yu laughing. ‘If I were to wear one of those, I
should look like one of those old fisherwomen you see in plays and paintings.’
Immediately after saying this she realized that she had virtually been offering herself
as a fishwife to Bao-yu’s old fisherman and wished the -remark unsaid. She blushed
with embarrassment and leaned forwards, racked with coughing, over the table. But
Bao-yu appeared not to have noticed. What drew his attention was the poem be had
just spotted which lay on the table beside her. He picked it up and read it. A murmur
of praise which escaped involuntarily from his lips at once brought Dai-yu to her feet.
She snatched the paper from him and burned it over the lamp. But Bao-yu only
laughed.
‘Too late! I’ve already memorized it.’
‘I want to, go to bed now,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Please go now. Come again tomorrow.’
Hearing her speak of bed, Bao-yu felt inside his tunic and pulled out a gold watch
about the size of a walnut which he proceeded to inspect. The hand was pointing
exactly midway between the sign of the Dog and the sign of the Pig: nine o’clock at
night.
‘Yes,’ he said, stuffing the watch hurriedly back into his tunic. ‘Time for bed. I’ve
tired you long enough.’
He put on his cape and his rain hat and went out, but was back again almost
immediately.
‘Is there anything you fancy to eat? Let me know if there is, and I’ll tell
Grandmother first thing tomorrow. It will be safer to tell me than trying to explain
what you want to the old women.’
Dai-yu smiled.
‘I’ll-think about it during the night and let you know first thing tomorrow. Listen: it’s
raining harder. You’d better go quickly. Have you got anyone with you?’
‘Yes,’ one of the did women standing outside on the veran?dah called into her.
‘We’re waiting with our umbrellas up and we’ve got the lantern ready.’
‘Lantern?’ said Dai-yu. ‘In this weather?’
‘The rain makes no difference,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s a horn lantern. They’re not
affected by rain.’
Dai-yu reached out and took down a lamp with a balloon ?shaped glass shade from
the top of her bookcase. She ordered one of the maids to light a little candle in it and
offered it to Bao-yu.
‘Take this. It’s brighter than a horn one, and it’s specially made for going out in the
rain with.’
‘I’ve got one like that myself,’ said Bao-yu, ‘hut I didn’t bring it because I was afraid
they might trip over and break it.’
‘Which is worse,’ said Dai-yu, ‘a broken lamp or a broken leg? You’re not used to
wearing patterns, so it’s important to see where you’re going. The others can carry
the horn lantern in front of you, and you can carry this glass lamp, which is handier
and brighter and specially made for going out in the rain with, yourself. There. You
can send it back to me to?morrow. And if you should break it well, it won’t be the
end of the world. What has made you of all people so parsimonious about things all
of a sudden? You’re as bad as the Persian with his pearl!’
Thus persuaded, Bao-yu took the lamp from her and set off, two old nannies with
umbrellas and a horn lantern in front of him and two little maids with umbrellas
bringing up the rear. He made one of the little maids hold the glass lamp Dai-yu had
given him and leaned on her shoulder until they were back home.
The departure of Bao-yu and his party was immediately fol?lowed by the arrival of
two old women from Allspice Court, also carrying lanterns and umbrellas, with a
large packet of bird’s nest and another packet containing little frosty star?-shapes of
dazzling white imported sugar.
You’ll find these a hit better than the stuff you can buy in the shops,’ they told Dai-yu.
‘Our young lady says this is to be getting on with and when you’ve finished it she’ll
send you some more.’
‘That’s very kind,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Won’t you sit outside with the girls and let them
give you some tea?’
‘We won’t, miss, thank you all the same,’ they said. ‘We’ve got other things to do.’
‘Ah yes, you’re busy,’ said Dai-yu, smiling. ‘I should have remembered. Now that it’s
getting colder and the nights are longer, I expect you will have started your
card-school again. Nothing like a little gambling to pass the long night hours I’
The women laughed good-humouredly.
‘I won’t deceive you, miss,’ said one of them, evidently the chief organizer. ‘I’ve got
a really nice little school going this year. There are always a few of us on night-duty,
you see, and we don’t like to risk falling asleep and missing our watch, so we find our
little card-school the best answer. It keeps us awake and, as you say, miss, it helps to
pass the time. Tonight it’s my turn to be banker. The Garden gate has been closed
now, so it’s time we got started.’
Dai-yu laughed.
‘Well, all I can say is that it’s very nice of you to have taken time off when you could
have been winning money, to go out in the rain and bring me these things.’ She
turned to one of her maids: ‘Give them a few hundred cash so that they can buy
some wine to warm themselves up with after the rain.’
The women thanked her delightedly, and having kotowed, hurried outside to collect
the money, after which they put up their umbrellas again and departed.
Nightingale first put away the bird’s nest and sugar and then, having moved the lamp
over to the bedside and let-down the blinds, helped Dai-yu into bed.
As she lay there alone, Dai-yu’s thoughts turned to Bao?-chai, at first with gratitude,
because of her kindness, but after?wards a trifle enviously, because Bao-chai had a
mother and brother and she had none. Then she began thinking about Bao-yu and
herself: how they had been such good friends to start with, but how later on
suspicion and misunderstanding had grown up between them. Then she listened to
the insistent rustle of the rain on the bamboos and plantains outside her window.
The coldness penetrated the curtains of her bed. Almost without noticing it she had
begun to cry. It was nearly three in the morning before she was properly asleep.
We leave her now, to continue our story in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 46

An awkward person is given an awkward mission
And a faithful maid vows faithfulness unto death



IT was not, we observed in the last chapter, until nearly three o’clock in the morning
that Dai-yu finally dropped off to sleep. We leave her at this point in our narrative
and return to Xi-feng, who, it will be remembered, had been summoned on business
of an unspecified nature by Lady Xing.
When the others had left, Xi-feng hurriedly changed into her going out apparel, got
into her carriage, and drove round to the establishment next door.
The air of mystery surrounding this summons persisted after her arrival. Lady Xing
dismissed the others who had been present and addressed her daughter-in-law
conspiratorially.
‘The reason I have sent for you is that Sir She has entrusted me with a matter of
some delicacy which I hardly know how to go about and I thought I had better
discuss it first with you. He has taken a fancy to Lady Jia’s maid Faithful and wants her
for his concubine; and he has given me the job of asking Lady Jia for her. As I see it,
there is nothing very unusual in such a request, but I am rather afraid that Lady Jia
may refuse and wondered if you had any bright ideas on how one ought to go about
this business.’
Xi-feng put on what she hoped was a disarming smile.
‘I don’t think it’s worth trying. I think it would be merely asking for trouble.
Without Faithful, Grandma would be completely lost; she’d never consent to give her
up. In any case, she’s often remarked, in private conversation about Father, that she
can’t understand why at his age he continues to sur?round himself with young
girls—“wasting their young lives” she calls it. She says it’s not good for his health, and
that he ought to save up his energies for his job and not fritter them away on
“drinking all day with his fancy women”. You wouldn’t derive much pleasure from
hearing this sort of thing said to your face, Mother, and I am very sure that Father
wouldn’t. Yet if you insist on approaching Grandma about this, I’m afraid that that’s
what will happen. It will be like poking a straw up a tiger’s nostril. I hope you won’t
be offended, but I’m afraid I daren’t approach her about this. I should only be
demonstrating my own powerlessness to help and making a lot of unpleasantness for
myself into the bargain. Father is inclined to be a bit ga-ga at times nowadays. It’s up
to you to talk him out of it, Mother. This sort of thing is all very well in a younger man,
but in someone of Father’s years, with children and grandchildren of his own, it is
really too shaming I’
Lady Xing sniffed.
‘Lots of men in well-to-do families like ours have troops of concubines. Why should
it be so shameful only in our case? Anyway, I don’t know what makes you think he’d
listen to me, even if I did try to talk him out of it. And even if Lady Jia is so attached to
Faithful, she may not find it all that easy to refuse when the person asking is an
eldest son with a grey beard who has held a position in the Government.
Incident?ally, I only asked you over here for your opinion. I don’t see why you should
have to start reading me a lecture. There was never any question of asking you to
approach Lady Jia for me: I shall naturally undertake that task myself. And as for
com?plaining that I haven’t tried talking Father out of this obviously you have no
conception of what his temper can be like. I did try to dissuade him, but he started
hollering at me almost before the words were out of my mouth.’
Xi-feng knew that her mother-in-law was a weak and silly woman, always willing, for
the sake of a quiet life, to fall in with her husband’s wishes. Apart from pleasing her
husband, her principal aim in life was to see how much she could squeeze out of the
domestic economy and diver? into her personal savings. Decisions both great and
small she left to him; but all household monies passed through her hands, and she
saw to it that they suffered a considerable diminution in the process. The reason she
gave for this pillage was Jia She’s extravagance. ‘I have to economize,’ she would say,
‘to make up for what Sir She wastes.’ Among the children and servants of the
household there was not one whom she trusted or whose advice she would listen to.
From the tone of what she had just heard, Xi-feng knew that her mother-in-law’s
obstinate streak had been aroused and that it would now be quite useless to reason
with her. She therefore smiled even more disarmingly and promptly changed her
tack.
‘Of course. You are right, Mother. I haven’t had enough experience to be able to
judge these matters. But now I come to think of it, it’s only natural that a mother
should give what she treasures to her own son. Who else would Grandma give her
favourite maid—or any other precious thing—to if not to Father? One shouldn’t
believe everything that people say about other people behind their backs. No, I can
see that now. I have been too credulous. One has only to think how you and Father
are with Lian. Many a time when Lian has done some?thing he shouldn’t have done,
you and Father have spoken as if you could hardly wait to lay your hands on him, but
when he eventually turned up, you have forgiven everything and ended up by giving
him some treasured possession. I’ve no doubt that in this case it will turn out in
exactly the same sort of way with Grandma and Father. As a matter of fact, Grandma
is in rather a good mood today, so if you are going to ask her, it would probably be
best to do so straight away. Let me go over first to keep her sweet for you. I’ll find
some excuse for leaving and taking the others with me when you arrive. That will
give you a good opportunity for raising this matter. If she says yes, that will, of course,
be splendid. But even if she doesn’t, no great harm will have been done, be?cause no
one else will know about it.’
Hearing what she wanted to hear, Lady Xing’s good humour returned and she
proceeded to tell Xi-feng what she had already decided to do.
‘Actually my idea is not to mention this to Lady Jia at first. I think I shall begin by
having a quiet word with Faithful her?self. Though she may be bashful, as long as she
doesn’t say anything against it when I’ve explained it all to her, I shall
know that as far as she is concerned it is all right. If I talk to Lady Jia then, though she
may be unwilling to part with her, she won’t be able to get over the fact that Faithful
herself is willing to leave. “There’s no holding someone who has a mind to go,” as
they say. I think there should be no difficulty.’
‘Trust you for sound planning, Mother!’ said Xi-feng. ‘That way sounds fool-proof.
After all, every one of these girls is ambitious—they all want to improve their
position and get on in the world—and it’s unthinkable that she should throw away
this chance of becoming almost a mistress in order to remain a maid and end up
marrying one of the grooms.
‘Exactly!’ said Lady Xing. ‘That’s exactly what I thought. Any of these senior maids
would give her ears for a chance like this. Anyway, you go over now—only don’t
breathe a word of this to anyone else!—and I’ll follow later on, when I’ve had my
dinner.’
Xi-feng reflected.
‘Faithful’s no fool,’ she thought. ‘Whatever Mother says, it’s far from certain that
she’ll accept. Suppose I do go first and Mother follows later. If Faithful says yes, all
well and good; but if she doesn’t, Mother has such a suspicious nature that she’s sure
to think it’s because I’ve blabbed and been encouraging the girl to play hard to get. It
will be humiliating for her to discover that my prediction was right, and that will
make her angry; and then she’ll take it out on me—which won’t be very amusing. It
would be better if we went over together; then, whether Faithful accepts or not, no
suspicion can possibly fall on me.’
‘Just now as I was on the point of coming over,’ she said, bringing these reflections
to a rapid conclusion, ‘two crates of quails arrived from my aunt’s. I told the servants
to fry them, intending to send them over later for your dinner. Then, on my way in
through your gate, I met some of the boys from here with your carriage. They said it
had something wrong with it and they were taking it outside to be mended. Why not
make use of my carriage instead? We can go over together in it now, and you can
dine at my place afterwards on the quails.’
Finding this proposal acceptable, Lady Xing called in her maids to help her change;
then, supported by her ever-solicitous daughter-in-law, she got into the latter’s
carriage and drove with her to the establishment next door. On their way Xi-feng
pointed out that if they arrived at Grandmother Jia’s place together, the old lady
might notice her outdoor clothes and ask her where she had been.
‘It would be better if you went in there alone, while I slip back to my own place to
change,’ she said. ‘I’ll join you later, as soon as I’ve got into my everyday clothes.’
Lady Xing thought that this sounded reasonable and went in on her own to see
Grandmother Jia. After chatting with her for a few minutes about nothing in
particular, she left on the pretext of visiting Lady Wang. This meant that she went out
through the rear of the apartment, so that her way took her past Faithful’s room and
she was able to look in casually in passing to see if she was there.
Faithful was sitting in her room sewing, but stood up as Lady Xing entered.
‘What’s that you’re embroidering?’ Lady Xing asked her. ‘Let me look.’
She took the embroidery from her hand and inspected it.
‘You are getting very good,’ she said, laying it down again, and proceeded to
scrutinize the girl carefully, from head to foot.
Faithful had on an almost new lilac-coloured dress of silk damask over which she
wore a dag-edged sleeveless black satin jacket. Her skirt was a pale eau de Nil. Lady
Xing observed the slender waist and elegantly sloping shoulders, the oval face, the
lustrous, raven-black hair, the slightly aquiline nose, the cheeks slightly spotted with
a few tiny moles. Faithful grew embarrassed and apprehensive beneath this scrutiny.
‘What brings Your Ladyship here at this hour?’ she asked. ‘You don’t often come
over in the afternoon.’
Lady Xing made a sign to the maids who had accompanied her to leave the room,
then, seating herself in Faithful’s place, she took the maid by the hand and smiled at
her graciously.
‘I’ve come to wish you joy, my dear.’
Hearing this, Faithful was able to guess, more or less, what her visitor had come
about. She coloured and hung her head in silence while Lady Xing continued.
‘You see, Sir She has no one nowadays he feels he can really rely on. He was
thinking of buying someone; but you know, you can never trust those girls you get
from the dealers. You don’t know how clean they are, and often you don’t find out
what the snags are until it is too late. They seem all right when you buy them, but
two or three days later you find them get?ting up to the most frightful antics. Well,
then he thought he’d pick someone from among our house-born servants, but he lust
couldn’t seem to find anyone good enough. Either they weren’t good-looking enough,
or their looks were all right hut their characters wouldn’t do, or whatever it was
there was always something wrong with them. Anyway—to cut a long story
short—after half a year’s careful study, he has finally decided that you are the cream
of the cream. In looks, in character, in behaviour he finds you perfect: gentle,
reliable—in fact, all the things he is looking for in a girl. So he’s decided to ask Lady
Jia if he can have you for his concubine. Of course, you would get much better
treatment than a newly bought girl from outside could expect. In your case we
should put your hair back straight away and treat you as a proper chamber-wife. You
would be ‘Auntie’ to the children and ‘Mrs’ to the maids. In fact, you would have
practically the status of a mistress. Now I know you are an ambitious young woman.
You know what they say: “True gold will find its price.” In your case it’s proved by the
fact that Sir She has taken this fancy to you. Here is a chance of doing all those things
you ever set your heart on doing. And if you have any enemies, you will be in a
position now to make them look very silly. Now—come along with me and tell Her
Old Ladyship all about it.,
She took Faithful’s hand and made as if to go, but Faithful reddened and snatched her
hand away. Lady Xing assumed that she did so from bashfulness.
‘Come,’ she said, ‘there’s no need to be bashful. You don’t have to say anything
yourself if you don’t want to. just come with me and let me do the talking.’
But Faithful still hung her head and did not move.
‘Surely,’ said Lady Xing, when it became evident that Faithful was determined not
to accompany her, ‘surely you can’t mean to refuse this offer? I must say, you’ll be a
very silly girl if you do. What, throw away the chance of becoming a lady in order to
go on being a maid? if you do, then in two or three years time when they marry you
off, it will only be to one of the boys, you know. You’ll still be a slave just the same.
Whereas if you come to live with us—well, you know my nature: I’m not a difficult
person to get on with; and Sir She always treats his girls very nicely. And after you’ve
been with him for a year or two, if you can bear him a child, you’ll be on the same
level as me: everyone in the household will have to jump to it when you give them
orders. If you throw away an opportunity like this, you’ll certainly live to regret it.”
Faithful continued to hang her head and say nothing.
‘You’re such a lively person as a rule,’ said Lady Xing.
‘ What’s got hold of your tongue? is there any particular thing about this
arrangement that doesn’t suit you? Please let me know if there is, and I promise that
it shall be altered.’
But Faithful still said nothing.
‘Oh, I know what it is,’ said Lady Xing. ‘I expect you’ve got parents and don’t like to
say anything until you’ve heard from them. Why yes, very right and proper. I shall get
in touch with your parents and no doubt you will be hearing from them in due course.
Then anything you want to say, you will be able to say to them.’
With that she left, and went round to Xi-feng’s apartment. Xi-feng had long since
changed back into her ordinary clothes. As no one else was about, she had taken the
oppor?tunity of telling Patience about her interview with Lady Xing. Patience was
amused, but shook her head doubtfully at Lady Xing’s optimism.
‘If you ask me, I think it’s very uncertain. From the way she’s always spoken in the
past when we’ve been alone together, I should think she’ll-refuse. Anyway, we’ll just
have to wait and see.’
‘Lady Xing is sure to come here afterwards to talk about what happened,’ said
Xi-feng. ‘If Faithful has accepted, it will be all right; but if Faithful hasn’t accepted,
she’s not going to be in a very good mood, and it would embarrass her to have you
here while she was telling me about it. You’d better order them to prepare some of
those quails and a few other dishes to go with them so that I can offer her dinner
when she arrives; but after you’ve done that, you’d better take yourself off for a bit
and don’t come hack until you think she’s gone.’
Patience gave Xi-feng’s instructions to the cook and then went off to enjoy herself in
the Garden.
*

When Lady Xing left, Faithful felt sure that she would go straight to Xi-feng’s for
consultation and that soon after that someone else would arrive and put the same
question to her again. it seemed to her that the best way of avoiding this would be to
decamp. She sought out Amber in order to give some cover to her exit.
‘If Her Old Ladyship should ask for me, tell her that I’m not feeling well and couldn’t
eat any lunch today. Say I’ve gone to walk in the Garden for a bit and shall be back
again shortly.’
Amber agreed to do this and Faithful went off to wander about in the Garden. While
she -was doing so, she came by coincidence upon Patience doing exactly the same
thing.
Seeing no one else but the two of them around, Patience felt no compunction in
revealing her newly acquired knowledge.
‘Look who’s here! she called out teasingly. Mrs Faithful!’
Faithful blushed bright red.
‘I suppose you’re in the plot against me too. Well, never mind. I’ll be having it out
with your mistress presently.’
Patience could see that Faithful was really angry, and regret?ted her foolish jibe.
Taking her by the hand, she led her to some rocks beneath a stand of maple trees
where they could sit down together, and proceeded to tell her all that Xi-feng had a
few minutes earlier told her.
‘Thank you,’ said Faithful when she had finished. ‘You and I at least are still friends.
When I think of our set how many were we?—Aroma, Amber, Candida, Nightingale,
Suncloud, Silver, Musk, Ebony, Kingfisher—she left to go with Miss Shi—Charmer and
Golden—they both died—Snowpink that was dismissed—you and me—there must
have been a dozen of us altogether: when we were young we always told each other
everything and shared everything together; but now that we are older, the others all
seem to go their different ways and just aren’t interested. Not me, though: I haven’t
changed. I’m just the same as I always was. I don’t have any secrets from any of you.
Now listen: I’m telling you this now for you to remember—only don’t go passing it on
to your Mrs Lian. It’s not just a question of not wanting to be his concubine. I
wouldn’t go to Sir She, not if Lady Xing had died and he sent matchmakers and
witnesses and asked me to be his proper wife!’
Patience was about to answer when there was a laugh from behind the rocks on
which they were sitting and a voice called out.
‘What’s this shameless boasting I hear? It’s enough to set one’s teeth on edge!’
Startled, the two of them rose to their feet and went to look behind the rockery to
find out who it was. Aroma emerged, laughing, as they did so.
‘What’s all this about? Tell me about it too.
The three of them sat down on the rocks together and Patience retold all that she
had just told Faithful.
‘Well!’ said Aroma when Patience had finished. ‘I suppose it’s not for someone in
my place to say so, but what a nasty old man! Unless they’re downright misshapen,
just about no one is safe from him.’
‘I can tell you a way out of this if you want to refuse,’ said Patience.
‘What?’ said Faithful.
‘Have a word with Her Old Ladyship and get her to tell him that she’s already given
you to Mr Lian. That’ll cool his ardour.’
‘You too now?’ said Faithful angrily. ‘You’re a nice lot, I must say! It was your
mistress who suggested that the other day. I thought we hadn’t heard the last of
that.’
‘If you don’t want either of them,’ said Aroma, ‘then if you ask me I think your best
plan would be to get her to tell him that she’s promised you to Master Bao. That
would put him off right away!’
Both embarrassed and-exasperated by these taunts, Faithful rounded on her
tormentors with some heat.
‘You’re rotten, both of you, and I hope you both come to bad ends! I thought you
were decent sorts who might try to comfort me in my trouble. But even if you don’t
care, you might at least refrain from treating it as a joke. I suppose you think you
don’t have to worry about me because your own futures are assured and each of you
will end up as chamber wife to the person of your choice. Well, as I see it, things in
this world don’t always turn out the way you want them to. I wouldn’t be quite so
cock-a-hoop if I were you. You might be in for some nasty shocks yourselves.’
The others saw that they had really rattled her and laughingly did their best to calm
her down.
‘Now, now, Faithful, don’t take it so much to heart. We three have been like sisters
ever since we were little girls. We were only teasing you a bit because there’s no one
else around. Tell us what plan you’ve decided on, so that we shan’t be so worried
about you;’
‘Plan?’ said Faithful. ‘I’ve got no plan. I just shan’t go to him and that’ll be the end
of it.’
Patience shook her head.
‘I very much doubt if it will. You know what Sir She’s temper is like. It’s true that he
can’t touch you as long as you’re with Her Old Ladyship; but you’re not going to be
with her all your life, are you? You’ll have to leave in the end, and if you fall into his
clutches then, you’ll be in real trouble.’
Faithful smiled grimly.
‘As long as Her Old Ladyship lives, I shall stay with Her Old Ladyship. And when all’s
said and done, even when the old dear goes to her rest, there are still the years of
mourning. There would be no question of his taking a concubine with his mother just
dead. And by the time the period of mourning is over—well, anything might have
happened. I’ll just have to wait and see. If I get really desperate, I can -always shave
my hair off and become a nun; or failing that, there’s always suicide. I don’t mind
going through life without a man. Glad to keep myself clean?
The other two tittered protestingly.
‘The things you say, Faithful! Have you no shame?’
‘There’s not much room left for shame when things have come to this pass,’ said
Faithful. ‘Anyway, if you don’t believe me, just wait and see. Lady Xing said just now
that she was going to see my parents about this. I wonder if she will. She’ll have to go
all the way to Nanking if she does!’
‘Your parents are looking after the house in Nanking and can’t be fetched,’ said
Patience, ‘but they can be got in touch with eventually. And in any case, your elder
brother and his wife are here. It’s a pity you’re a house-born servant and not on your
own here like me and Aroma.’
‘It makes no odds,’ said Faithful. ‘ “You can take an ox to the water, but you can’t
make him drink.” Just because I refuse him, he’s not going to kill my parents!’
While she was talking, her sister-in-law appeared some distance from where they
were sitting, walking in their direction.
‘There you are!’ said Aroma. ‘They’ve evidently found that they can’t get in touch
with your parents, so they’ve already had a word with your sister-in-law.’
‘That cow!’ said Faithful. ‘She’s a regular camel-dealer, that one. She’d just jump at
a thing like this!’
The ‘cow’ was already upon them, smiling all over her face.
‘Ah, here you are, miss! I’ve looked for you everywhere. Come with me. I’ve got
something to tell you.’
Patience and Aroma fussed round her, inviting her to sit with them on the rock.
‘No, you young ladies sit down;’ said the woman. ‘I’ve got to have a word with our
Faithful.’
‘Is it really very urgent?’ they asked her innocently. ‘We’ve been playing “I spy”.
Can’t it wait until we’ve finished guessing?’
‘What is it?’ said Faithful. ‘Why not just tell me?’
‘Come with me,’ said her sister-in-law. ‘I’ll tell you over there. It’s good news,
anyway.’
‘Oh, is it by any chance the thing Lady Xing was talking about?’ said Faithful.
‘There!’ said her sister-in-law. ‘You knew about it all the time! What were you
having me on for? Now come on, hurry, and I’ll tell you all the details. It’s a
wonderful, wonderful piece of news!’
Faithful stood up and spat hard and deliberately in her sister-in-law’s face.
‘Why don’t you take your bloody trap out of here?’ she shouted, pointing at her
angrily. ‘ “Wonderful news” indeed! I suppose you’ve been studying the way families
of maids who’ve become concubines can throw their weight about, so you just can’t
wait to push me into that fire. If I find favour, then of course you’ll be the great lady
and be able -to put on airs and throw your weight about too. If I don’t, if I’m a
failure—oh, you’ll just draw your tortoise-head back into your tortoise-shell and
leave me to get on with it. Whether I live or die, it will be all the same to you.
She began crying hysterically and had to be restrained and comforted by Patience
and Aroma.
‘Huh!’ said her sister-in-law in an unsuccessful attempt to retrieve her ruffled
dignity. ‘Whether you’re willing or not, you might at least be civil. Anyway, I don’t see
why you need drag other people into it. “One doesn’t discuss short legs in front of a
dwarf,” they say. I make no comment on the nasty things you said about me, but
what about these young ladies? They’ve done nothing to provoke you. This talk
about concu?bines is not very nice for them.’
‘Oh no!’ said the two young ladies in question. ‘She wasn’t referring to us when she
said -that. It’s you who are dragging in other people. What makes you think that
either of us has been chosen as a concubine? By whom? Even if we had been, neither
of us has any family in this household to throw their weight about, so she can say
what she likes on the subject:
there’s no occasion for us to get worked up about it.’
‘It’s because I made her look silly,’ said Faithful. ‘She’s trying to cover up by setting
you two against me. Fortunately you are too intelligent to be taken in. I lost my
temper just now and I’m afraid I didn’t choose my words very carefully. She evidently
thought she could take advantage of that.’
Faithful’s sister-in-law was by now finding her situation so disagreeable that she
removed herself from it by walking away in a huff. Faithful herself was still extremely
angry and for some time continued to hurl invectives at her retreating back; but
Patience and Aroma reasoned with her, and gradually she began to calm down.
‘Why were you hiding there just now?’ Patience asked Aroma when Faithful’s
composure had been restored. ‘It’s funny that we didn’t see you.’
‘I’d been over to Miss Xi-chun’s to see Master Bao,’ said Aroma, ‘but I got there a
moment too late. They said he had just that minute left for home. I couldn’t
understand why in that case I hadn’t run into him on the way, so I thought per?haps
he might have gone to Miss Lin’s; but just as I was going there to look for him, I met
one of Miss Lin’s people who said that he wasn’t with her, so I began wondering if he
might have gone out of the Garden altogether. Then just at that moment you came
along from the direction I was looking in, so I slipped behind a tree and hid. When
Faithful came, I slipped out from behind my tree and hid behind this rock. I could see
you both sitting there talking, but your two pairs of eyes couldn’t see me.
‘And your three pairs of eyes couldn’t see me!’ said a mock?ing voice behind them.
The three girls jumped in surprise. When they turned to look, it was Bao-yu himself
who walked out from behind the rock.
Aroma was the first to recover her voice.
You led me a nice dance!’ she said. ‘Where have you been all this time?’
‘As I came out of Xi-chun’s place, I could see you coming towards me,’ said Bao-yu.
‘I knew it must be me you had come for, so I hid myself to give you a surprise. I
watched you as you walked by with your head in the air. Then I watched you go into
Xi-chun’s courtyard. Then I saw you come out again. Then I saw you stop and ask
someone something. It was terribly funny. I was hoping that you would eventually
come by the place where I was hiding, so that I could pop out and make you jump.
But then you started dodging around, and I could see that you were hiding from
someone else and evidently planning to play the same trick on them. So I peeped out
to see who it was and found that it was these two. Then I began gradually working
my way round behind you, and when you stepped out and showed yourself, I slipped
forward and hid in the place where you had been biding.’
‘We’d better go behind and have another look,’ said Patience. ‘We’ll probably find
two more people hidden back there!’
‘No, I think there really are no more now,-’ said Bao-yu.
When she realized that Bao-yu must have heard everything that had been said,
Faithful lay face downwards on the rock and pretended to be asleep. Bao-yu laughed
at her and gave her a little prod.
‘It’s damp on that stone. Much better come indoors if you want to lie down.’
He tried to pull her up, at the same time inviting Patience to accompany them back
home for some tea. When Patience and Aroma added their own coaxing to his,
Faithful finally rose to her feet and the four of them went together to Green Delights.
Bao-yu had, indeed, heard everything from his hiding-place, and his concern for
Faithful made him very unhappy. When they were back, he lay back silent on his bed
worrying about it while the three girls laughed and chattered in the adjoining room.
*

When Lady Xing asked Xi-feng about Faithful’s parents, she learned that her father’s
name was Jin Cai and that he and her mother lived as caretakers at the Jia family
mansion in Nanking and seldom came up to the capital.
‘But she has an elder brother Jin Wen-xiang, who is one of Grandmother’s buyers,’
said Xi-feng, ‘and her sister-in-law is Grandmother’s chief laundress.’
The laundress was duly summoned and Lady Xing carefully explained what was
required of her. The woman was naturally delighted and went off in a great bustle of
self-importance to look for Faithful, confident that she had only to state her mission
for the matter to be successfully concluded. Ill pre?pared, therefore, for Faithful’s
acrimonious rebuff or the strictures of Patience and Aroma which followed it, she
re-turned to Lady Xing to make her report in a state of angry mortification.
‘It’s no good, I’m afraid. She just swore at me.’ Since Xi-feng was present, the
woman dared not mention Patience, ‘That Aroma was there, too, helping her. Some
of the things she said to me—well, I wouldn’t offend Your Ladyship’s ears by
repeating them. I think you and Sir She would be well advised to buy a girl elsewhere.
That little fool Faithful evi?dently wasn’t meant for such great fortune—nor we to
share it, seemingly.’
‘Whatever has this got to do with Aroma?’ said Lady Xing. ‘I wonder how she got to
know about it.’ She paused for a moment. ‘Was there anyone else there?’
‘Miss Patience was there,’ said the woman.
‘I wish you’d given her a box on the ears then and told her to come home,’ Xi-feng
put in hurriedly. ‘She went oft wandering somewhere or other as soon as I left the
house and there wasn’t a sign of her when I got back. If she was there, she’ll have put
in her pennyworth too, I suppose.’
‘Well, she wasn’t exactly there,’ said the woman, ‘she was quite a way off. I couldn’t
see her very clearly. Maybe it wasn’t her, I could have been mistaken.’
‘Go and find her at once,’ Xi-feng said to the servants. ‘Tell her I’m back and Lady
Xing is here and she is to come home immediately.’
Felicity hurried forward to report:
‘Miss Lin sent round three to four times to ask if Patience would go over to her
place, -so Patience went to see what she wanted. I went there to call her back when
you came in just now, but Miss Lin said would I please tell you that she wants
Patience a bit longer to do something for her.’
‘She’s always asking Patience to do things for her,’ said Xi-feng, with pretended
annoyance. ‘I wonder what it is this time.
Resourceless, now that her plan had misfired, Lady Xing returned home as soon as
she had eaten dinner and in the evening informed Jia She of what had happened.
After reflecting for some moments, Jia She ordered Jia Lian to be summoned
immediately.
‘Jin Cai and his wife aren’t the only couple looking after our Nanking property,’ he
began as soon as Jia Lian arrived. ‘Have him recalled immediately.’
‘Last time we had a letter from Nanking,’ said Jia Lian, ‘it said that Jin Cai was in a
delirium and they’d already issued the money to buy his coffin. He may well be dead
by now; and even if he isn’t, he’s probably unconscious and wouldn’t be much use to
us back here. And his old woman is as deaf as a post.
‘Villain! Parricide!’ Jia She shouted, in instant fury. ‘Trust you to know that! Get out
of my sight!’
Startled by his father’s unaccountable anger, Jia Lian retreated in a hurry. Shortly
after he had done so, Jin Wen-xiang was sent for.
Jia Lian, not daring either to go back home or to go in again to his father, stayed near
at hand in his outer study, waiting to see what happened. After a while Jin Wen-xiang
arrived, and Jia Lian watched him being conducted through the inner gate by the
pages. After a lapse of time in which he could comfort?ably (had he been so minded)
have eaten four or five meals, he saw Jin Wen-xiang come out again, but was still too
scared to make inquiries. He did not do so until be had allowed what he thought was
a safe interval to elapse after Jin Wen-xiang’s departure, and was then informed that
his father had gone to bed. Only then did he dare to go back home; and it was not
until Xi-feng informed him that night that he understood what it was all about.

*

That night Faithful was unable to sleep. Her brother came next morning to ask
Grandmother Jia if he could take his sister back home for the day. His request was
granted, and Grandmother Jia ordered Faithful to get ready. Faithful did not want to
go, but overcame her reluctance because she did not want the old lady to suspect
that anything was amiss.
When they were -home, her brother told her all that Jia She had said, promising that
if she accepted, her position would be an honoured one: she would become ‘Mrs Jin’,
and all the household would look up to her. But no matter what he said, Faithful set
her face firmly against it all and obstinately con?tinued to say ‘no’. In the end her
brother had no alternative but to go back to Jia She and tell him that his sister was
un?willing. Jia She was greatly incensed.
‘Now look here,’ he said, ‘you go back and get your wife to tell her this: Sir She says:
             The moon ever loved a young man.

He knows all about that saying. No doubt she thinks him too old for her and has set
her heart on one of the younger ones Bao-yu, probably, or my son Lian. Tell her, if she
has, the sooner she abandons hope in that direction the better, because if I can’t
have her, she may be very sure that no one else in this family will dare to. That’s one
thing. And here’s another. She may think that because she’s Lady Jia’s favourite, she
can look forward to marrying outside one day and becoming someone’s regular wife.
Well if so, just let her get this firmly into her mind: whoever or wherever she marries,
she needn’t think she will ever escape me. If she dies or is prepared to live all her life
an old maid, I might admit myself beaten; but otherwise, never. So unless she
proposes to choose one of those alternatives, she’d better hurry up and change her
mind. It will be a great deal easier for her if she does.’
Each sentence of the above had been punctuated by a nervous ‘Yessir’ from Jin
Wen-xiang. Jia She continued.
‘Now don’t think you can fool me over this in the hope of getting better terms.
Tomorrow I shall send Lady Xing over to have a word with Faithful herself. If Faithful
still refuses after your wife has spoken to her, then that is no fault of yours and I
shan’t hold it against you. But woe betide you if when Lady Xing talks to her she finds
that she is willing!’
After a good many more ‘Yessirs’ Jin Wen-xiang withdrew and went back home.
When he got back, he did not even wait to transmit Jia She’s message through his
wife, but went straight in and told it all to Faithful himself It made Faithful so angry
that for some time afterwards she was unable to speak. Finally, after some inward
calculation, she answered him as follows.
‘Even if I am willing, you’ll have to take me back first, so that I can have a word
about it with Her Old Ladyship.’
Supposing this to mean that she had changed her mind, her brother and his wife
were overjoyed, and the latter at once undertook to go with her to see Grandmother
Jia.
It so happened that when they arrived, Lady Wang, Aunt Xue, Li Wan, Xi-feng, Bao-yu
and the girls, and some of the senior stewardesses from outside were all - there with
the old lady sharing a joke. Faithful led her sister-in-law through their midst, knelt
down at her mistress’s feet, and with tears stream?ing down her face, proceeded to
tell her what Lady Xing had said to her the day before, what her sister-in-law had said
to her in the Garden, and what her elder brother had told her that morning.
‘When I refused, Sir She said it was because I fancied Master Bao, or else because I
was saving myself to marry someone outside. He said that even if I were to fly to the
world’s end, I should never as long as I live escape out of his clutches: sooner or later
he’d have his revenge. But I’ve made my mind up, and I’m telling Your Ladyship here,
in front of all these witnesses. I don’t care whether it’s Master Bao or Prince Bao or
the Emperor Bao, I don’t ever want to marry anyone. Even if Your Ladyship herself
were to try and force me to, I’d rather cut my own throat than marry. I’ll serve Your
Ladyship until you leave this world for the next one; and when that day comes, I
shan’t go back to my brother and his wife; I shall either take my own life or I shall cut
my hair off arid become a nun. And in case anyone should think I don’t really mean
this and am only saying it to get myself out of a corner, I call on heaven and earth and
all the gods and the sun and moon to be my witness: if I don’t honestly and sincerely
mean every word I say, may I be struck with a quinsy this very moment and matter
burst out of my mouth!’
She had hidden a pair of scissors up her sleeve before she came, and as she uttered
this oath, she undid her hair with her left hand and began hacking away at it with the
scissors in her tight. The servants rushed forward to stop her, but before they could
lay hands on her, she had already cut off a large hank. It was fortunate that her hair
was so thick and strong. Observing with relief that she had not succeeded in cutting
through all of it, the servants wound up what remained and refastened it on her
head.
By the time Faithful had finished speaking, Grandmother Jia was trembling all over
with rage.
‘I have only this one girl left that I can rely on,’ she said, speaking half to herself,
‘and now they are plotting to take her away from me.’
As she looked at those standing around her, her eye fastened upon Lady Wang.
‘You deceive me, all of you. You who are outwardly so dutiful: you are secretly
plotting against me like all the rest. Whenever I have any good thing you come and
ask me for it. All my best people you take away from me. Now I have only this one
poor girl left to me; and because you see that I am nice to her, it infuriates you—you
can’t bear it! And now you’ve found this means of getting her away from me, so that
you can have me at your mercy.’
Lady Wang had risen to her feet as soon as Grandmother Jia addressed her, but dared
not defend herself; Aunt Xue could not very well intervene when the object of these
stric?tures was her elder sister; and Li Wan had hustled her young charges from the
room at the first hint of impropriety when Faithful began her complaint.
Tan-chun, always one of the more thoughtful members of the family, realized that
however unjust the accusation, Lady Wang was in no position to answer back. She
realized that Aunt Xue could not speak up for her own sister or Bao-chai say anything
when her mother was silent and that Li Wan, Xi-feng and Bao-yu were even more
disqualified from coming to the rescue. This was exactly the sort of situation in which
a young unmarried granddaughter could be useful. And since Ying-chun was too
docile and Xi-chun too childish, Tan-chun herself, after listening for a while at the
window, boldly stepped into the room and faced her grandmother with an intrepid
smile.
‘How can this matter have anything to do with Mother, Grandma? Can you think of
any reason why a younger brother’s wife should be consulted about her
brother-in-law’s private business?’
Grandmother Jia was at once all smiles.
‘Of course not, my dear. I am a silly old woman! Mrs Xue, you must try not to laugh
at me. Your sister is a most dutiful daughter-in-law: not like She’s wife, who is so
scared of her husband that she has no time for me - beyond what she does for form’s
sake. I have done your sister a very grave injustice.’
Aunt Xue murmured something in reply, afterwards adding as a politeness:
‘The younger son’s wife is often the more favoured one. Perhaps you are biased,
Lady Jia.’
‘No,’ said Grandmother Jia firmly, ‘I am not biased. Bao-yu,’ she said, turning to her
grandson, ‘why didn’t you speak up when I falsely accused your mother? How could
you stand by like that and watch her being treated unjustly?’
‘How could I take Mother’s side against Uncle and Aunt?’ said Bao-yu. ‘Obviously
someone was to blame; but if it wasn’t Mother, who was I to say that it was? I could
hardly have said that it was me. Somehow I don’t think you would have believed
me!’
Grandmother Jia laughed.
‘Yes, I suppose you are right. Go and kneel down to your mother, then, Bao-yu. Tell
her that I’m getting old and that she is not to be upset by what I said to her. Ask her
to forgive me for your sake.’
Bao-yu quickly went over and knelt before Lady Wang. But before he could relay his
grandmother’s message, his mother had laughingly prevented him.
‘Get up at once and don’t be ridiculous, Bao-yu I How can you possibly apologize
for Grandma to me ?’
Bao-yu hurriedly got up to his feet.
‘What about you, Feng?’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Why didn’t you try to stop me?’
‘I’ve been trying to restrain myself from blaming you for what’s happened,’ said
Xi-feng. ‘I don’t know why you should pick on me.’
Grandmother Jia’s laughter was echoed by the others present.
‘Oh? Now this is interesting. I should like to know why you think I’m to blame for
what has happened.’
‘You shouldn’t be so good at training your girls,’ said Xi-feng. ‘When you’ve brought
up a beautiful young bulrush like Faithful, can you blame other people for wanting
her? It’s a good job I’m only your granddaughter-in-law. If I’d been your grandson, I
should have asked you for her for myself a long time ago. I shouldn’t have waited till
now, I can tell you!’
‘Oh,’ said Grandmother Jia, laughing.’ So it’s all my fault, is it?’
‘Of course it’s your fault,’ said Xi-feng.
‘In that case I won’t try to keep her,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You can take her back
with you.’
‘Not just now;’ said Xi-feng. ‘In my next life, perhaps. If a good girl in this life, I
might be reborn as a man, and I can ask you for her then!’
‘Go on, take her with you!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You can give her to your Lian.
See if that shameless father-in-law of yours still wants her then!’
‘Lian doesn’t deserve her,’ said Xi-feng. ‘All he’s fit for is a couple of sad old
dumplings like me and Patience!’
This set everyone laughing.
A maid came in to announce someone.
‘Lady Xing, ma’am.’
Lady Wang hurried out to meet her.
What followed will be revealed in the next chapter.

CHAPTER 47

In pursuit of love the Oaf King takes a fearful beating
And from fear of reprisal the Reluctant Playboy makes a
hasty getaway



HEARING that Lady Xing had arrived, Lady Wang at once hurried out to meet her.
Lady Xing had come over to see if there had been any change in Faithful’s attitude.
She was ignorant of the fact that the secret was now out and that Grandmother Jia
knew everything. The first she heard of it was when quietly informed by some of
Grandmother Jia’s women as she entered the old lady’s courtyard. She would have
liked to turn back, but by then it was already too late: she had already been seen and
announced by the servants inside, and when her sister-in-law Lady Wang came out to
meet her, she was obliged to go in with her and pay her respects to Grandmother Jia.
Finding that her greetings were received by the old lady in stony silence, she was
covered with shame and confusion.
By this time Xi-feng had slipped out on pretext of other business and Faithful had
gone off to her own room to nurse her anger alone. Fearing that their presence
might add to Lady Xing’s embarrassment, Aunt Xue, Lady Wang and the rest also, one
after another, withdrew. When she saw that she and Lady Xing were alone together,
Grandmother Jia at last broke her silence.
‘I hear you have been playing the matchmaker for your husband,’ she said. ‘I must
congratulate you on your wifely virtue though I must say, I think that in this case you
are carrying wifeliness a little far. You have children and grand-children of your own
now: why should you be frightened of his temper still at your age? Yet they tell me
that you positively encourage his excesses.
Lady Xing blushed crimson with embarrassment.
‘I have tried several times to dissuade him, without suc?cess. I am sure you must
realize that I have acted against my will in this matter.’
‘You did what you were told, all the same,’ said Grandmother Jia sharply. ‘Would
you do what you were told if he asked you to kill someone? Just reflect for a moment.
There is only your sister-in-law, poor, simple soul—she is always ailing from
something or other—to worry about the responsi?bilities of this household. It’s true
that she has Lian’s wife to help her, hut she has so much to do that she hardly knows
which way to turn—always “putting the rake down to pick up the broom”. And I have
to cut down on all my activities nowadays. So if there is ever anything that your
sister-in-law and Feng have overlooked, Faithful is the only one left to make sure that
my needs are attended to. She is a child who notices things. If she sees that I lack
something, she will either ask for it herself or have a word with one of the other two
and make sure that I get it. Think of all the hundreds and thousands of things there
are to be done in this household. If I hadn’t got Faithful, how could the other two
avoid overlooking some?thing once in a while? So what would you have me do then?
Would you expect me to start worrying about all these things myself? Should I have
to start calculating what I needed every day and go running off to the other two to
ask them for it? Of all the girls I’ve ever had, Faithful is the only one left me now who
is a bit older and more responsible than the rest—who understands my little ways
and knows how I like things done. There’s a genuine bond between us—for example,
she would never take advantage of our relationship, as some girls would, to ask other
people for clothes or money for herself. One consequence 6f this is that not only
Feng and your sister-in-law, but everyone else in the household, from the highest
down to the lowest, is able to trust her. It means that quite apart from the fact that I
have someone I can rely on, Feng and -your sister-in-law are saved a great deal of
worry; because with a girl like that to look after me, I don’t suffer when they
occasionally forget something, and that keeps me in a good temper. If Faithful were
to leave me now, who would you get for me to put in her place? And even if you
could find such a jewel, she’d need to have a tongue in her head too. She’d be no use
to me if she didn’t have my Faithful’s gift for expressing herself. As a matter of fact
I’ve been think?ing of sending someone round to your husband to tell him that if he
would care to buy himself a girl, he’d be very welcome to do it with my money. I
don’t mind if it costs me eight thousand—ten thousand even—but if it’s this girl of
mine he wants, I’m afraid he can’t have her. Tell him that if he wants to be a dutiful
son, he’ll be doing more for me by leaving me my Faithful, to serve me during the
few years that yet remain, than if he were to come over and wait on me in person,
morn?ing, noon and night. It’s turned out very conveniently, your coming over just
now: you’ll be able to take this message back to him yourself and I can be sure of its
being properly delivered.’
She called for the servants.
‘What’s happened to everybody? We were just in the middle of a nice chat when
suddenly everyone went away.’
The maids, with answering cries, went off to look for the others. Soon all had been
reassembled except Aunt Xue, who showed some resistance to the summons.
‘I’ve only just got back,’ she said. ‘What’s the point of going out again?’
‘Have a heart, Mrs Xue I’ said the maid. ‘Her Old Ladyship is in a passion. If you
don’t come, no one else will ever shift her out of it. If it’s the walking that bothers
you, I’ll carry you there on my back I’
‘Get along with you, little monkey I’ said Aunt Xue, laugh?ing. ‘A few hard words
won’t hurt you.’
She went with the maid nevertheless. On her arrival she was cordially welcomed by
Grandmother Jia.
‘What shall we do?’ said the old lady. ‘Shall we play cards? Come and sit by me,
Mrs Xue. You haven’t had much practice. If the two of us sit together, there will be
less chance of Feng confusing us.’
‘Yes,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘You will have to keep an eye on my hand and help me out a bit.
Is it to be just the four of us, or shall we have one or two more?’
‘Just us four, surely?’ said Lady Wang.
‘No, let’s have one mote,’ said Xi-feng. ‘It will make it more interesting.’
‘Go and call Faithful, someone,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘She can sit below me. Mrs
Xue’s eyesight isn’t too good. Faithful will be able to keep an eye on both our hands.’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘I know you can read and write,’ she said to Tan-chun. ‘I suppose you haven’t
learned how to tell fortunes too, by any chance ?’
‘What a strange question!’ said Tan-chun. ‘You should be concentrating all your
energies on winning some of Grandma’s money, not thinking about having your
fortune told.’
-’I thought you -might be able to tell me how much I’m going to lose today,’ said
Xi-feng. ‘No question of winning anything. Look how Grandma’s got me ambushed on
every side before we’ve even started playing!’
Presently Faithful arrived and sat in the place below Grandmother Jia. Xi-feng sat
below Faithful. A red blanket was spread over the table, the cards were shuffled, the
players cut for deal, and the game began.
After they had been playing for some minutes, Faithful noticed that Grandmother Jia
had a nearly full hand and only needed a Two of Coins to go out. She made a sign to
Xi-feng, whose turn it was to discard. Xi-feng pretended to be in great doubt as to
what she ought to play.
‘I’m sure Aunt Xue is hanging on to the card I want. I’d better let her have this one,
and then perhaps she’ll part with it.
‘I’m sure I haven’t got anything you want,’ said Aunt Xue,
‘I’d need to look at your hand before I believed that,’ said Xi-feng.
‘You’re very welcome to,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘Come on, now! Put that card down and
let’s see what it is.’
Xi-feng laid the card down in front of Aunt Xue: Two of Coins.
‘It’s no good to me,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘but I’ve an idea your grandmother may be
going out now.’
‘Oh, no I’ cried Xi-feng in mock dismay. ‘It’s a mistake. I didn’t mean to discard that
one.’
But Grandmother Jia, with a crow of triumph, had already thrown down her cards.
‘You dare take that back! You shouldn’t make mistakes!’
‘I told you I needed a fortune-teller,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Well, I played the card, so I
suppose I’ve no one but myself to blame.’
‘I should think so too!’ said Grandmother Jia. Give yourself a good hard slap on the
face if you want to know where the fault lies!’ She turned to Aunt Xue. ‘You mustn’t
think
I’m grasping, Mrs Xue. I don’t play for -the money; but I do so enjoy winning!’
‘Of course,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘No one would be so idiotic as to suppose that you
played for the money. Hearing this, Xi-feng, who had meanwhile been counting out
the money she had lost, abruptly stopped, and threaded the coins back onto the
string.
‘Right!’ she said, speaking to the others present. ‘That settles it! She doesn’t play
for the money, she just enjoys winning. Well I am mean and grasping, I’m afraid, and
when I lose, I like to know how much. But if that’s the way she feels, back it all goes
again!’
When Grandmother Jia played cards it was her unvarying custom to let Faithful
shuffle for her. She had been talking to Aunt Xue throughout Xi-feng’s bit of by play,
but broke off when he became aware that Faithful had made no move. ‘Come child,’
she said. ‘You’re not too upset to shuffle for me, are you?’
Faithful took up the cards with a laugh. ‘No, only Mrs Lian hasn’t paid up yet.’
‘Oh, hasn’t she? ‘said Grandmother Jia. ‘She’ll be lucky if she gets away with that!’
She called one of the junior maids to her. ‘Take that string of cash from in front of
Mrs Lian and bring it here.’
The little maid did as she was bid -and laid the money on the table beside
Grandmother Jia.
‘Please let me have it back,’ Xi-feng pleaded, ‘—so that I can give you the right
amount.’ ‘Feng really is rather mean,’ said Aunt Xue jokingly. ‘It’s only a game, after
all.’
Xi-feng stood up and, laying a hand on Aunt Xue’s arm, pointed out to her the
wooden chest in which Grandmother Jia kept her money.
‘You see that, Aunt? I don’t know how much of my money has at one time or
another found its way in there. Before I’ve been playing half an hour, my money in
the chest begins calling to my money on the table to come and join it. All I have to do
now is wait until it’s called it all in, then the game will be over and Grannie will be in
a good temper again and I shall be able to go and get on with my work.’
By the time she had finished -saying this, Grandmother Jia and all the others present
were laughing. They were still laughing when Patience, fearing that her mistress
might have insufficient money by her, came in bringing another string of cash.
‘Don’t put it down in front of me,’ Xi-feng told her. ‘Put it down beside Her Old
Ladyship, so that all my money can go into the chest together. We don’t want the
money in the chest to have to go through the -business of calling for it all over again.’
This made Grandmother Jia laugh so much that she scat?tered the cards she was
holding all over the table.
‘Tear her mouth!’ she said to Faithful, giving her a playful push.
Patience laid the money down as she was bidden, and after laughing a while with the
others, went out again. On her way out of the courtyard she ran into Jia Lian, who
was just about to enter the gate.
‘Where’s Lady Xing?’ he asked her. ‘Sir She has sent me to look for her.’
‘She’s been standing in there with Her Old Ladyship for the last half hour,’ said
Patience. She hasn’t dared to move yet, but I dare say she’ll get away as soon as she
can. Her Old Ladyship has been in quite a tizzy this morning, but thanks to the
Mistress, who’s been all this time humouring her, she’s gradually beginning to calm
down a bit.’
 ‘Oh well, when I go in I shall say that I’ve come to find out if Her Old Ladyship is
going to Lai Da’s place on the four?teenth, so that I know whether or not to have the
carriages ready,’ said Jia Lian. ‘I can mention that Lady Xing is wanted as an
afterthought. And after that perhaps I shall stay on and chaff the old lady a bit for a
few minutes. That should he all right, shouldn’t it?’
‘If you’re asking my opinion, I think you’d do much better not to go in at all,’ said
Patience. ‘Everyone’s been in trouble with her today even Her Ladyship and Bao-yu. If
you go in now, you’ll walk straight into it.’
‘Oh, surely it’s all over now, isn’t it?’ said Jia Lian. ‘Surely she’s not going to start all
over again? It’s nothing to do with me, in any case. And Sir She did ask me to go and
fetch Mother myself. If he finds that I’ve sent someone else to do it, he’s in such a
bad temper already, that he’ll probably use that as an excuse to take it out on me.’
He began to go in, and Patience, to whom this sounded reasonable enough, turned
back and followed him in across the courtyard. Entering Grandmother Jia’s outer
door, Jia Lian crossed the reception room on tiptoe and peered into the inner room
at the back. He could see his mother standing there.
Xi-feng, who had sharper eyes than the rest, spotted him at once and made a sign to
him not to enter and another sign to Lady Xing indicating that she was wanted
outside. Lady Xing could not simply walk out, so she filled a cup with some tea and
set it down in front of Grandmother Jia. This caused the old lady to turn round; and
as Jia Lian chanced at that very moment to be looking in at the doorway and was
unable to withdraw his head in time, she caught a momentary
glimpse of him before he disappeared.
‘Who’s that outside?’ she said. ‘It looked like one of the boys peeping in there just
now.’
‘Yes’ said Xi-feng, quickly rising to her feet and going over to the doorway, ‘I
thought I saw someone’s shadow there just now.’
Jia Lian walked smiling into the room.
‘I’ve come to ask if you are going on the fourteenth, Grandma, so, that I shall know
whether to get the carriages ready or not.
‘In that case why didn’t you come in straight away,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘instead
of lurking around outside?’
‘I could see that you were playing cards,’ said Jia Lian with a somewhat artificial
smile. ‘I didn’t like to interrupt you. I was hoping to get my wife to come out so that I
could ask her.’
‘And what is there so extraordinarily urgent about this that you needed to ask her
now?’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘If you’d waited until she got home, you could have
asked her all you wanted to then. Why this extraordinary conscientiousness all of a
sudden? Eavesdropping is what you were up to more likely, or spying for somebody
else. Whatever it was, you gave me a nasty turn, creeping around in that sneaky,
under?hand way. Disgusting creature! Your wife will be with me a long time yet
playing cards. Better get back to that Zhao Er woman while you have the chance and
carry on where you left off with your plans- for poisoning her!’
The others all laughed.
‘It was Bao Er’s wife, my old love, not Zhao Er’s,’ said Faithful, laughing.
‘That’s what I said, didn’t I?’ Grandmother Jia snapped. ‘Well, “Zhao” or “Bao” or
brown cow how can !be expected to remember such things? The very mention of
them makes me feel angry. There were three generations of the family above me
when I came to this household as a young bride, and now there are three
generations below me, and I’ve seen many shocking and many wicked and many
peculiar things during the fifty-four years since first I came here, but this sort of thing
is simply outside my experience. Now be off with you!’
Jia Lian bolted, not daring to say a word. Patience, who had been standing
meanwhile outside the window, quietly mocked him as he came out:
‘I told you so, but you wouldn’t listen. You walked straight into the net, didn’t you?’
Just at that moment Lady Xing came out.
‘This is all Father’s doing,’ said Jia Lian. ‘Now we have to face the consequences.’
‘Unfilial wretch!’ said Lady Xing. ‘Some people would die for their fathers, but
you—a few harmless words and you are already whining and complaining. What’s
the matter with you? You haven’t been hurt yet—though I should look out, if I were
you: Father’s been pretty angry these last few days.’
‘Come on, you must hurry back, Mother,’ said Jia Lian. ‘He sent me to fetch you a
long time ago.’
He saw his mother out of the main part of the mansion and round to Jia She’s
quarters next door. Lady Xing then gave her husband, in briefest possible outline, a
report of what had happened; and since it was now evident that nothing more could
be done about Faithful, Jia She had to put up with his mortification as best he could.
He did, however, from that day onwards, discontinue all duty calls on his mother on
the pretext of being ill. Lady Xing and Jia Lian were sent to make the mandatory calls
on her in his stead.
Meanwhile his agents scoured the market for likely girls. A suitable one was
eventually purchased for the sum of five hundred taels a seventeen-year-old girl
called Carmine, who was duly installed in his room. But that is another part of our
story.
The card-game continued until dinner-time, and it was not until after dinner that the
company finally broke up.
Of the day or two which followed these events our story preserves no record.

*

The fourteenth came. Before it was yet daylight, Lai Da’s wife came round once more
to renew her invitation. Grand?mother Jia responded enthusiastically and, taking
Lady Wang, Aunt Xue and the young people along with her, spent a considerable part
of the day in the Lai family’s private garden.
Lai Da’s garden was not, of course, to be compared with Prospect Garden;
nevertheless it was spacious and well-made and among its pools, rocks, trees and
pavilions were to be found several features of striking interest or beauty.
The menfolk who were gathered in the reception hall at the front or ‘outer’ part of
the establishment included Xue Pan, Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian, Jia Rong and a number of
the more closely related members of the Jia clan outside the immediate family. Jia
She was conspicuously absent. Young Lai had also invited some of his office holding
colleagues and a few young men of good family as congenial company for the Jias.
One of these last was a young gentleman called Liu Xiang?lian whom Xue Pan had
met on some previous occasion and hankeringly remembered ever since. The
discovery that he was a keen amateur actor one, moreover, who specialized in
romantic roles had led Xue Pan to jump to the wrong conclusion and assume that he
must share the same ‘wind and moonlight’ proclivities as himself. Eager to make his
closer acquaintance but hitherto denied any opportunity of doing so, he was
overjoyed at finding him among the company on this occasion and consequently in a
state of excitement which rendered his behaviour extremely unpredictable.
Cousin Zhen had also heard of Liu Xiang-lian and admired him. Today, under pretext
of being a little drunk, he had taken the liberty of asking him to perform for them,
and Liu Xiang-lian, supported by the hired professional players, had obliged by
appearing on the stage in two operatic num?bers. When he rejoined the company,
Xue Pan took the oppor?tunity of moving over to his table and began plying him with
all sorts of questions and insinuations.
Liu Xiang-lian was a young man of excellent family who, having lost both his parents
in early youth, had failed to complete his education. He was of a dashing, impulsive
nature, impatient of niceties. His chief pleasures were exercising with spear or sabre,
drinking, and gambling; but he was not averse to gentler pastimes: he frequented the
budding groves and could play on both the flute and the zither. Because he was so
young and handsome, many who did not know him mistakenly supposed that, being
an actor, he must have the usual actor’s propensities. Lai Da’s son Lai Shang-rong had
been a good friend of his for years and it was only natural that he should invite him
on this occasion to help him enter?tain his guests. Under these circumstances Lin
Xiang-lian was prepared to put up with a certain amount of drunken horse-play; but
Xue Pan was too much for him, and soon his atten?tions were becoming so
distasteful that Xiang-lian resolved to leave at the earliest opportunity in -order to
escape from them. Before he could break away, however, Lai Shang-rong detained
him.
‘Bao-yu gave me a message for you just now. He said that though he saw you
briefly when he arrived, with so many other people around, be didn’t have a chance
of talking to you properly. He’s most anxious that you should stay on so that he can
talk to you afterwards. If you are really set on going, wait while I call him out and you
can have a word with him now. What you do after that is your own affair: I certainly
shan’t try to detain you.’ He called a waiter to him: ‘Look inside and get hold of one
of the old women. Tell her to have a quiet word with Master Bao to say that he’s
wanted here outside.’
After about the time it would take to drink a cup of tea in, Bao-yu appeared.
‘Here you are, Uncle Bao!’ said Lai Shang-rong when he had joined them. ‘I leave
Xiang-lian in your bands, I’ve got to go and look after my guests now.’
With that he left them.
Taking Xiang-lian by the hand, Bao-yu led him into a study at the side of the hall
where they sat down together.
‘Have you visited Qin Zhong’s grave recently?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Certainly I have,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘The other day I was out hawking with a few of
the others and happened to notice that we were only half a mile or so away from it.
It occurred to me that it might not have stood up to all that heavy rain we had in the
summer, so I left the others and went off to have a look. As a matter of fact it had
been washed away a bit; so the day after I got back I scraped a few hundred cash
together, went back first thing next morning, hired a couple of labourers, and got it
patched up again.’
‘That explains it,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Last month, when the pods were beginning to form
on the lotuses in Prospect Garden, I picked ten of them and sent Tealeaf to offer
them at his grave. When he got back, I asked him if the rains had damaged it at all,
and he told me that not only had it not been damaged, but that it was in even better
condition than it had been the time before. I knew from that that some friend must
have been there recently and restored it. I wish I weren’t so cooped up all the time at
home. I can never do anything I want to by myself. The slightest move I make is sure
to be seen and reported, and either I’m physically prevented from going where I
want to or else lectured at until I promise not to go. It’s useless for me ever to say
that I’m going to do anything, because I know that I shan’t be allowed to. I can’t even
spend my own money in the way I want.’
‘This thing at least is something you don’t need to worry about,’ said Xiang-lian,
‘with me outside to look after it for you. Anyway, it’s the thought that counts. It’s
enough to know that you would do it yourself if you could. I’ve already put aside the
money for his anniversary on the first of next month. You know how broke I always
-am. I never have any savings because as soon as I’ve got any money I spend it all.
Well, this time I thought I’d better not take any chances, so I put some by well in
advance, so-as not to have to stretch my hands out helplessly when the time conies.’
‘I was going to send Tealeaf round to see you about that,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but you
never seem to be at home; and you’re such a rolling stone that no one ever knows
where to look for you.’
‘Don’t bother to try,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘This is a matter in which each of us does what
he can. Anyway, I shall be going away quite soon. It will probably be three or four
years before I come back again.’
‘Why?’ said Bao-yu in some agitation.
‘That’s something you’ll know -soon enough when the time comes. I must be going
now.’
‘Must you?’ said Bao-yu. ‘I so seldom get a chance of seeing you. Can’t we leave
together in the evening?’
‘I’m afraid it’s that cousin of yours,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘The usual problem. If I stay any
longer, there’s sure to be some kind of trouble. I’d much better go now and avoid it.’
Bao-yu reflected for some moments.
‘Yes, I suppose in that case you’d better. Only, if you really and truly are going away
for a long time, do please let me know before you start. Please don’t just slip away
without telling me.’
His eyes brimmed over with tears.
‘Of course I’ll come and say good-bye to you,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘As long as you
promise not to tell anyone.’ He stood up to go. ‘You go in again now. Don’t try to see
me out.’
He left the study and made his way to the main gate: but there, unfortunately, was
the very person he was trying to avoid.
‘Who’s let my little Liu get away?’ Xue Pan bawled.
Xiang-lian’s eyes flashed angrily. In other circumstances he would have laid him out
there and then with a single blow of his fist; but reflecting that to do so now would
be inter?preted by the others as drunken brawling and would moreover be
embarrassing to his host, he restrained himself with some effort
Xue Pan, in whose besotted eyes he appeared as a coveted treasure that was moving
at last within his grasp, lurched towards him, smiling happily, and gripped him firmly
by the arm.
‘Where are you off to little pal?’
‘Just-going out for a stroll,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘I’ll be back again directly.’
‘It won’t be any more fun here without you,’ said Xue Pan. ‘Do stay a bit
longer—just to show me that you care for me, eh? If it’s business that’s taking you
away, don’t worry, leave it to me! I don’t care how important it is whether it’s a
career you’re after or making a pile—with me for a pal you’ll have no more to worry
about!’
Angered and revolted by his odious intimacy, Xiang-lian quickly thought of a plan for
disposing of him. Drawing him aside to a spot where they could not be overheard, he
pre?tended to question his sincerity.
‘Are you really so fond of me, or are you just pretending?’ Xue Pan was almost
beside himself. His eyes became tiny slits of pleasure:
‘How can you ask such a question, my dear? Pretending? May I die this instant if I
am!’
‘Good. This place here is not convenient. We’d better go in again now and sit with
the others for a bit. Then I’ll leave, and you can leave a bit after me and follow me
back to my place. We’ll make a night of it. I’ve got a couple of very nice little boys
there who’ve never been “out” before; so you needn’t bring anyone with you: all the
service we’ll need is there already.’
Xue Pan was by now so delighted that his drunkenness had already half left him.
‘Do you mean this?’
‘What a person!’ said Xiang-lian. ‘One opens one’s heart to you and you don’t trust
them.’
‘No, no, no,’ said Xue Pan hurriedly. ‘I trust you. I’m no fool. There’s only one thing,
though: I don’t know where you live. If you leave before I do, where am I to look for
you?’
‘My place is outside the North Gate,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘Do you think you can tear
yourself from home and spend a whole night outside the city?’
‘What do I need a home for if I’ve got you?’ said Xue Pan. ‘All right,’ said Xiang-lian.
‘I’ll wait for you on the bridge then, outside the North Gate. We’d better get back to
the party now. Don’t forget: wait a bit after I’ve gone before going yourself; then -no
one should suspect anything.’
‘Yes,’ said Xue Pan, ‘yes.’
The two of them then went in again and resumed their places. Xue Pan found waiting
difficult and kept his eyes constantly on Xiang-lian, watching for him to go. At the
same time he began, in joyous anticipation of the pleasures in store, to drink with
greater and greater abandon, not waiting for the wine to be offered, but stretching
out rudely to left and right of him and plying himself from the wine-kettles of his
neighbours. Soon he was very drunk indeed.
Xiang-lian now rose to go and succeeded in slipping out of the main gate unobserved.
First he gave an order to his page Almond, who was waiting there:
‘You go home now. I have some business outside the city to attend to. I’ll be back
later.’
Then he vaulted into the saddle and rode off until he came to the North Gate of the
city. Passing through, he rode on till he came to the bridge, where he halted and took
up his-station-to wait for Xue Pan’s arrival.
After the time it would take to eat a meal, he caught sight of Xue Pan hurrying along
in the distance. His mouth was open, his eyes were staring, and his head turned from
side to side as he looked anxiously about him, for all the world like one of those little
clapper drums that children twirl upon a stick. So intent was he on scanning the
remoter parts of the landscape that he failed to take note of what was nearer at hand
and rode right past Xiang-lian without seeing him. Xiang-lian, who for all his loathing
could not but laugh at this, gave his horse rein and followed after. Presently Xue Pan
began to notice that he was getting into the open country and brought his horse
round about. As he did so, he found himself almost face to face with Xiang-lian.
‘I knew you wouldn’t fall me,’ he cried delightedly.
Xiang-lian smiled back.
‘Let’s go on a bit further—just in case anyone is tracking us.’
He trotted on ahead and Xue Pan followed, keeping as close to him as he could.
Presently, having satisfied himself that the country ahead was quite deserted,
Xiang-lian dis?mounted near the edge of a reed-filled dyke and tied his horse up to a
tree.
‘You get down too,’ he called pleasantly to Xue Pan. ‘Let’s first swear an oath that if
either of us is unfaithful to the other or betrays our secret to anyone, it shall happen
to him as the oath shall say.’
‘Yes,’ said Xue Pan. ‘Good ideal’ He dismounted eagerly tied his horse to another
tree, and straightway knelt down and began his oath:
‘If ever, in the days to come, I prove unfaithful or betray this secret to another, may
Heaven and Earth destroy.’
He got no further. At that point there was a great thump and the sensation of being
hit on the back of the neck by an object like a large iron hammer. Everything became
suddenly black, except that the darkness was filled with a confusion of flying stars,
and he collapsed forwards helplessly upon the ground.
Xiang-lian stepped up and surveyed him from above. Someone not used to taking
punishment, he concluded. It would be unwise to use too much force on him.
Turning him over, he performed, with a few deft flicks over Xue Pan’s face, the
operation which is described in the profession as ‘opening up the fruits hop’.
At first Xue Pan struggled to get up, but Xiang-lian lashed out with his foot and sent
him sprawling once more upon his back.
‘You were willing, just as much as I was,’ Xue Pan muttered plaintively. ‘You had
only to say so if you weren’t. Why fool me into coming out here with you and then
beat me up?’
He began cursing him obscenely.
‘You blind iniquity!’ said Liu Xiang-lian. ‘You don’t know who you’re dealing with.
You should be begging for mercy right now, not swearing at me. You’re not worth
killing, though. I’ll just give you a little lesson.’
He picked up his horsewhip and turning Xue Pan on his face once more, proceeded to
deal him thirty or forty cuts along the length of-his body, from his shoulders down to
his calves. Xue Pan was by now half sober, and finding the pain un?bearable, began
to roar.
‘Look at you!’ said Xiang-lian contemptuously. ‘I should have thought you could
take your medicine a bit better than that.’
He took him by the left leg and dragged him a few steps to where the reeds began, in
the stagnant ooze of the dyke, so that he was coated from head to foot with the
liquid mud.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘do you know who I am?’
As Xue Pan merely lay in the mud whimpering and made no reply, he threw away his
whip and gave him a few thumps with his fist. Xue Pan rolled about and bellowed:
‘You’ve broken my ribs. I know you’re straight. It was the others who told me you
weren’t. I shouldn’t have listened to them.’
 ‘Leave the others out of this,’ said Xiang-lian. ‘I’m talking about now.’
‘Now?’ said Xue Pan. ‘Now I know you’re straight. I kn6w I was wrong. What more
can I say?’
‘You’ll have to talk a bit prettier than that before I’ve finished with you,’ said
Xiang-lian.
‘Old pal—’ Xue Pan began, whimpering.
Xiang-lian dealt him another thump with his fist.
‘Ow! Ow! Chap—’
Two thumps this time.
‘Ow! Ow! Sir, then. Please sir, forgive me for being so blind. From now on I shall
honour you and fear you.’
Now drink some of this water,’ said Xiang-lian. Xue Pan knitted his brows with
disgust:
‘But this water is really filthy. I couldn’t get it down.’
Xiang-lian raised his list threateningly. ‘I’ll drink,’ said Xue Pan hurriedly. ‘I’ll drink.’
He bent down and drank a mouthful of the water at the base of the reeds; but before
he could swallow it, there was a great retching noise and he vomited up all that he
had recently eaten and drunk.
‘Filthy pig!’ said Xiang-lian. ‘Now eat that up and I let you off’
Xue Pan began kotowing to him.
‘Please, for your soul’s sake, earn a bit of merit: don’t try to make me do that! I
couldn’t do that if you -killed me.’
‘This stench is poisoning me;’ said Xiang-lian; and leaving Xue Pan, he unfastened
his horse, led it off a few paces, vaulted into the saddle, and galloped away.
Observing with relief that Xiang-lian had really gone, Xue Pan, cursing his folly for
having been so egregiously mistaken in his man, attempted to struggle to his feet;
but every part of him was hurting so much that it was impossible for him to rise.

*

Meanwhile, back at the party, Cousin Zhen and the others, suddenly noticing that the
two of them were missing, sought them for a while without success. Someone did
say that they thought they might have gone out of the North Gate; but Xue Pan had
told his pages not to follow him, and they were all in such dread of their master that
none of them dared go out there to look. In the end Cousin Zhen became so uneasy
that he sent Jia Rong with some of the boys to track them down.
Their trail led them through the North Gate and about two thirds of a mile along the
road which crosses the bridge outside it. There, suddenly, they caught sight of Xue
Pan’s horse, tied up to one of the trees at the side of a reed-filled dyke.
‘Good!’ they said. ‘Where the horse is, the rider must be.’ And all of them went
over to where the horse was standing.
As they did so, they heard someone groaning among the rushes; and there, when
they went to look, was Xue Pan, his clothes torn, his face cut and swollen almost
beyond recognition, and so besmirched with mud from head to foot that he had
more the appearance of an old wallowing sow than of a human being.
Jia Rong had little difficulty in guessing what had happened. Slipping from his horse,
he ordered the servants to help Xue Pan to his feet.
‘Tireless in the pursuit of love, Uncle I’ he said cheerfully, while they struggled to
do his bidding. ‘This time it’s led you into the reeds of the marshes. I suppose the
Dragon King must have taken a fancy to you and carried you off to be his son-in-law.
To judge from appearances, I should say that you -must have got caught up on his
horn!’
Xue Pan wished that the earth would open and swallow up his shame.
As there was clearly no question of getting him onto his horse, Jia Rong told one of
the boys to hurry back to the street outside the North Gate and hire a carrying chair.
When Xue Pan had been helped into this, they had him carried into the city,
themselves accompanying him on horseback. Jia Rong mischievously proposed that
they should take him back to the Lais’ house to rejoin the party: but Xue Pan
entreated so piteously and begged him so earnestly not to tell anyone of his plight,
that Jia Rong relented and allowed him to go back home alone.
Jia Rong himself returned to the party to report back to his father. From his account
of the state Xue Pan had been in when they found him Cousin Zhen deduced that he
must have been beaten up by Liu Xiang-lian but appeared remarkably unconcerned,
for he merely laughed and observed that ‘he could do with the lesson’. It is true that
he went to inquire after him in the evening, when he got back home from the party;
but Xue Pan was by that time nursing his injuries in bed and declined to see him on
the grounds that he was feeling too ill.
When Grandmother Jia and her party had got back to their several apartments, Aunt
Xue and Bao-chai found Caltrop with her eyes all swollen from weeping. On
discovering the cause, they rushed in to look at Xue Pan. Fortunately he appeared to
have no bones broken, but his face and body had taken a terrible battering. Torn
between maternal anguish at his plight and anger at the folly which had occasioned it,
Aunt Xue inveighed against Xue Pan and Xiang-lian by turns. She wanted to tell Lady
Wang and get her to have Xiang-lian arrested, but was dissuaded from doing so by
Bao-chai.
‘It’s not important enough for that, Mamma. The two of them had been drinking
and fell out over their cups, that’s all there was to it. Whenever that happens, it’s
always the drunker of the two who gets the worst of it. Besides, every?one knows
what a lawless, ungovernable creature Pan is. It’s only because you’re his mother
that you feel differently. If it’s satisfaction you want, that can easily be arranged. Just
wait a few days until Pan is better and can get about again. I’m sure Mr Zhen and Mr
Lian and the other menfolk will be unwilling to pass over this in silence. Probably
they will get up a little party and ask this person to it and make him apolo?gize to Pan
in front of everyone and admit that he was to blame. But if you insist on making an
issue of it now and telling Aunt about it, you will make it appear that you are so blind
to Pan’s faults that you allow him to go around provoking other people, but that as
soon as someone stands up to him, you fly up in arms and use our relations’
influence to oppress them.’
Aunt Xue at once saw the force of this.
‘You are quite right, my child. I was being silly.’
‘Dear Mamma! But now you are being sensible. He doesn’t fear you, and he won’t
listen to anyone else. He just goes on getting worse and worse. One or two good,
sharp shocks like this might bring him to his senses.’
Meanwhile Xue Pan lay on the kang in his bedroom, cursing Xiang-lian by every name
he could think of and calling on his boys to smash up his house, to beat him to death,
to have the law on him. Aunt Xue shouted to them that they were to do no such
thing. To Xue Pan she explained that Xiang-lian was in any case beyond the reach of
his vengeance.
‘Xiang-lian behaved very bad because he was drunk. When he came to himself
afterwards he was very sorry; and now, because he is afraid of the consequences, he
has fled the coun?try.’
When Xue Pan heard that, he—
But you shall learn that (if you wish) in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 48

The Love Deluded One turns his thoughts to trade and travel
And the Poetry Enthusiast applies herself to making verses



XUE PAN gradually calmed down when his mother told him that Xiang-lian had fled.
After four or five days the pain of his injuries had subsided, but not the bumps and
bruises; and as, while these still dis?figured him, he was unwilling to meet any of his
acquaintance, he kept to his room on the pretext that he was still too ill to go out.
The tenth month soon came. Several of the employees work?ing in Xue Pan’s shops
in the capital wanted to go back home for the annual settling of accounts and Xue
Pan found himself giving a farewell party for them in his room. Among those present
was one Zhang De-hui, the sixty-year-old manager of his largest pawnshop. He had
worked with the family since he was a lad and now had a household of his own and
an income of two or three thousand taels. He was planning to leave with the others
but not return until half way through the following year, as he explained to Xue Pan
on this occasion.
‘There’s a great shortage of stationery and perfumed goods just now,’ he said.
‘These things are sure to fetch high prices next year. I’m proposing to send my eldest
boy here after New Year to look after the shop, so that I can travel back later. I shall
buy up supplies of stationery and sandalwood fans on my way, aiming to get back
here in time for the Double Fifth. I reckon it should be possible to make several
hundred percent profit, even after the excise and all the other expenses have been
deducted.’
This gave Xue Pan an idea.
‘I haven’t felt like seeing anyone since that beating,’ he thought, ‘and some excuse
for getting away from every?body for a year or so is just what I’ve been looking for.
Obviously I can’t go on staying indoors and pretending I’m ill indefinitely. And for
another thing, I haven’t done very much with my life to date: I’m neither a scholar
nor a soldier, and though I call myself a merchant, I’ve never handled a pair of scales
or an abacus in my life, not to mention the fact that I know nothing about the places
and peoples of the Empire or its roads and waterways. Why don’t I get a bit of capital
together and spend a year or so travelling around with Zhang De-hui? It won’t matter
much whether I make any money or not; the main thing is that it will get me away
from my disgrace; and there is the added advantage that I shall be able to put in a bit
of sight-seeing as well.’
Having so decided, he waited until the other guests had gone and then, making
himself as agreeable as he knew how, informed Zhang De-hui of his decision and
asked him to delay his departure by a few days so that he would have time to
prepare.
That evening he told his mother.
Aunt Xue’s initial reaction was one of pleasure, but this quickly gave way to
misgivings. It was not that she attached much importance to the loss of a little capital;
she was con?cerned about the scrapes he might get into away from home. And so
she ended up by refusing.
‘I think you’d better stay here with me. I should worry less. After all, you don’t need
to make this money. It isn’t as if you haven’t got enough to spend.’
But Xue Pan had made his mind up and was not to be put off.
‘You’re always telling me how inexperienced I am and how ignorant and how
unwilling to learn; yet now that I’m making a real effort to turn over a new leaf by
standing on my own feet at last and learning a bit about the business, you won’t let
me. What do you want me to do? I’m not a girl, to be shut up at home all the time:
you’ll have to let me out some time or other. Besides, Zhang De-hui is an old,
experienced person and he’s worked for our family all his life. If I’m with him, I don’t
see how anything can go wrong. Even if I did ever slip up, I’m sure he’d soon tell me
off about it and put me right. And as he knows all there is to know about prices and
so forth, I should naturally always consult him on business matters. You couldn’t ask
for better conditions; yet you won’t let me go. Very well, I’ll get ready in secret and
leave without telling you. You’ll see me when I come back next year, after making a
fortune! I’ll show you!’
With that he went off to bed in a huff.
Aunt Xue discussed the matter with Bao-chai after he had gone.
‘It’s good that he should want to occupy himself with something serious at last,’
said Bao-chai. ‘The trouble is, of course, that however fair-sounding his intentions
may be now, once he’s outside he may succumb to his old weaknesses again, and
then it will be that much more difficult to control him. However, I suppose that is a
risk one has to take. If he is really going to reform, then this experience may prove a
life-long blessing. If he is not, I don’t see that there is very much left that you can do.
After all, there is only so much one can do for another person: the rest must be left
to Heaven. Pan is a grown man now, Mamma. If you maintain that he is too ignorant
of the world to be allowed out into it, you are not going to make him any less
ignorant by keeping him shut up indoors. And since he is being so reasonable for
once, I should make up your mind that you are going to lose eight or nine hundred
taels and hand it over to him to see how he manages. After all, he will have someone
from our own business helping him and they may well feel some compunc?tion
about cheating him; so it’ s by no means a foregone conclusion that he will lose it all.
And for another thing, away from home there won’t be those worthless companions
of his to egg him on; nor, on the other hand, will he have anyone to fall back on if he
gets into trouble. He will have to fend for himself: eat when he can and go hungry
when he can’t. And when it dawns on him that he is on his own and has no one he
can lean on, he may begin to behave a bit better. Surely it’s worth trying?’
Aunt Xue pondered her daughter’s words for some minutes.
‘I think you are probably right,’ she said eventually. ‘I certainly don’t mind using
up some of our money on the experiment. If he can learn a bit of sense from it, it will
have been money well-spent.’
Having thus concluded their discussion, the two of them went to bed.
Next day Aunt Xue had Zhang De-hui invited round once more, and while he was
being entertained by Xue Pan in the study, stationed herself in the loggia at the back
and, address?ing him through the window from this hidden vantage point, entrusted
her boy, with many a fond and careful instruction, to his care. Zhang De-hui gave
vigorous assurances of good intent, and having finished his meal, stood up and took
his leave, stopping on his way out to add a few words to Xue Pan about arrangements
for their departure:
‘The almanac says the fourteenth is the best day for travel?ling. I should start
packing and hiring mules straight away if I were you, Mr Xue, so that we can make a
start first thing on the fourteenth.’
Xue Pan, delighted at the prospect of getting away so soon, hastened to relay this to
his mother.
Assisted by Bao-chai, Caltrop and a couple of old nannies, Aunt Xue devoted the
whole of the next few days to packing. She selected five male members of the
domestic staff to ac?company Xue Pan on his travels: the husband of his o1d wet
nurse, two experienced older servants who had been in service with his father, and
two of the pages who normally waited on him. Three heavy carts were hired for the
luggage and four travelling mules. Xue Pan himself planned to ride on a mule from his
own stables—a large, sturdy animal with an iron-grey coat. He also planned to take a
saddle-horse of his own as an alternative mount. When all other preparations had
been completed, Aunt Xue and Bao-chai devoted the remaining evenings to
exhortation and admonishment of the prospective traveller.
On the thirteenth Xue Pan went to take leave of his Uncle Wang’s family in the city,
after which he went round the two mansions saying his good-byes to the Jias. There
was some talk of Cousin Zhen and one or two of the others seeing him off next day
for a parting cup on the road; but whether or not anything came of it our narrative
does not disclose.
Early on the morning of the fourteenth Aunt Xue and Bao-chai accompanied him to
the outer threshold of the inner gate and watched him with tearful eyes until they
could see him no more.

*

When Aunt Xue moved from Nanking to the capital, she had brought only four or five
couples with her in addition to the handful of old nannies and young unmarried
maids of her immediate household. Now that five of the menfolk had gone off to
accompany Xue Pan on his travels, only one or two male servants were left. The very
day that Xue Pan started on his journey, Aunt Xue went into his study, had all the
small fur?niture, blinds, curtains and other movables carried out and stored in her
own apartment, and ordered the wives of the absent menservants to move in with
her to sleep. She also ordered Caltrop to tidy up Xue Pan’s sleeping quarters, lock the
door, and move - into her apartment with the rest.
‘But Mamma,’ Bao-chai protested, ‘you’ve already got all those others to keep you
company. Why not let Caltrop move in with me? It gets lonely in the Garden now that
the nights are longer: another companion to sit with me in the evenings when I am
sewing would be very welcome.’
‘Of course,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘I was forgetting. I should have thought of it myself. I was
telling Pan only the other day: Apricot is so young and scatter-brained and Oriole on
her own really isn’t enough for you. We really ought to buy you another girl.’
‘Buying is all very well if you know what the girl is going to be like,’ said Bao-chai;
‘but if you make a bad choice, then not only have you wasted your money—that’s a
small consideration—but you have a very great deal of trouble on your hands. If we
are going to buy a girl, it would be much better to take our time over the inquiries
and not get one until we are quite sure about her background.
She told Caltrop to get her bedding and toilet things to?gether and ordered Advent
and one of the old nannies to carry them for her to Allspice Court. Then she and
Caltrop went into the Garden together.
‘I was dying to ask the Mistress if she would let me move in with you after Mr Xue
had gone,’ said Caltrop, ‘but I was afraid she might think I only wanted to get into the
Garden to play. How wonderful that you should have asked her for me!’
‘I knew you’d had your heart set on this Garden for some time past,’ said Bao-chai
with a smile, ‘but you haven’t really been free till now. Dashing in and out for a few
minutes each day wouldn’t have given you time to enjoy it properly. That’s why I
have waited for this opportunity before asking. Now you will be able to settle in and
spend a whole year here. You get your wish, you see, and I gain a companion!’
‘Dear Miss!’ said Caltrop ‘Now that there is the time and the opportunity, will you
teach me how to write poetry, please?’
Bao-chai laughed.
‘You’re like the -famous general: “one conquest breeds appetite for another”. I
advise you to take things more gently. Today is your first day in the Garden. If I were
you, I should go out of that corner gate and, beginning with Lady Jia’s, call in at all the
different apartments and pay your respects to everybody. You needn’t go Out of your
way to tell them that you have moved into the Garden; but if the subject should
happen to arise, tell them that I have brought you in as my companion. After that,
when you get back into the Garden, you ought to go round and call on all the young
ladies.’
Caltrop was just going oft to do as Bao-chai advised, when Patience came hurrying in.
She was in a state of some agita?tion, which she smilingly masked, however, in
response to Caltrop’s eager greetings.
‘I’m bringing her in here to live with me as my companion,’ Bao-chai explained. ‘I
was just about to report the matter to your mistress.’
‘You don’t need to do that, Miss!’ said Patience. ‘What?ever next?’
‘On the contrary,’ said Bao-chai. ‘It’s the correct thing to do. “Every inn has its
landlord and every temple its priest,” as they say. Even though it is not a very
important matter, I think I should report it, if only so that the women on night watch
may know that there are two more girls—her and Advent—living in the Garden now,
and make no difficulties about letting them in and out. Anyway, if you will tell your
mistress when you get back, I won’t bother to send anyone about it myself.’
Patience promised that she would.
‘Now you’re here,’ she said to Caltrop, ‘you ought -to go and introduce yourself to
your new neighbours.’
‘I was just sending her off to do that when you came,’ said Bao-chai.
‘Well, you can leave nr out,’ Patience told Caltrop. ‘Mr Lian is ill at home in bed.’
Caltrop murmured a reply and went off to make her calls, beginning with
Grandmother Jia.
As soon as she had gone, Patience -seized Bao-chai’s hand and asked her, in a low
and urgent voice, whether she had heard ‘their’ news.
‘No,’ said Bao-chai. ‘I’ve been so busy these last few days helping to get Pan off that
I haven’t heard anyone’s news. I haven’t even seen any of the girls during the past
day or two.’
‘Sir She has beaten Mr Lian so badly that he can hardly move. Do you mean to say
you haven’t even heard that?’
‘I heard something to that effect,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but I didn’t know whether to
believe it or not. I’d been thinking of going to ask your mistress about it when you
came in just now. What did he beat him for?’
‘It was that toad Jia Yu-cun’s doing,’ said Patience bitterly. ‘Horrible man! It was a
bad day for this family when they got to know him. I don’ t know how much trouble
he hasn’t stirred up in the few years since first he came here. Last spring Sir She saw
some antique fans somewhere which so impressed him that when he got home and
looked at his own collection he decided that they were all no good and at once sent
every?one scouring around for some mote. Now there was a certain poor, unlucky
devil they call “Stony”—that’s a nickname, of course: I don’t know what his real
name is—so hard up that he never had enough to eat but who, it go happened, was
the owner of a collection of twenty antique fans that he guarded very closely, not
even allowing them to be taken out of his door. Mr Lian had a terrible job even
getting to see this man. In the end he did though, and eventually, after a great deal of
persuasion, managed to get himself invited into the house to have a look at the fans.
Mr Lian said he was only allowed a glimpse of them even then, but he said you could
see at once that they were the kind of fans that simply can’t be had anywhere today.
The fansticks were made of very special kinds of bamboo—naiad’s tears, black
bamboo, fawnskin and jadewood—and the paintings on them were all by old masters.
When he told Sir She about them, Sir She said at once that come what may he must
have them and that Stony could name his price. But Stony didn’t want a price not if
they offered him a thousand taels a fan, he said. He said he would rather die of
hunger and cold than sell them. There was nothing Sir She could do about that, of
course, except swear all the -time at Mr Lian for being “incompetent”. But I ask you,
Miss: Mr Lian had already promised five hundred taels cash down and still old Stony
had refused, so what more was there he could do? The matter might have rested
there if that black-hearted villain Jia Yu-cun hadn’t got to hear about it. He soon
thought of a way. He made out that Stony owed the government some money, had
him hauled off to the yamen, and when he got there, told him they would have to
detrain on his property to pay off the debt. Then he sent his officers round to Stony’s
house, seized the fans, valued them at a government price, and sent them to Sir She
as a present. Poor old Stony! I don’t know whether he’s alive now or dead. What I do
know is that when Sir She was telling Mr Lian how he had come by the fans at last,
Mr Lian couldn’t help remarking that he didn’t see anything very “competent” about
ruining a man and stripping him of all he possessed for so trifling a reason. That
made Sir She very angry, because of course he assumed that Mr Lian was really
getting at him. That was the main reason for the beating; but then there were a
number of smaller things a few days later—I don’t even remember now what they
were. They seem to have brought things to a head, because he suddenly went for
him. He didn’t pull him down and beat him with a flat-stick or a cudgel in the normal
way either: he just picked up the first thing that came to hand—I don’t know what it
was—and started hitting him with it where he stood. He cut his face open in two
places. We heard that Mrs Xue has got some kind of lotion for injur?ies of this sort
and I wondered if you’d mind letting me have a tablet.’
Bao-chai at once sent Oriole for the tablets and told her to bring two of them.
‘I won’t go and see your mistress now, under the circum?stances,’ she said, when
she handed them to Patience. ‘Give her my regards, though, won’t you?’
Patience thanked her and left.

*

Our story returns now to Caltrop. After dinner, by which time she had finished
making her calls, while Bao-chai went to join Bao-yu and the others in Grandmother
Jia’s apartment, Caltrop went off on her own to visit the Naiad’s House.
Dai-yu was by this time well on the way to recovery. She seemed so delighted to hear
that Caltrop had moved into the Garden, that Caltrop felt emboldened to make her a
request:
‘Now that I’m here and have got more time to spare, do you think you could teach
me .to write poetry? It would be such a piece of luck for me if you would.’
‘You can make your kotow and become my pupil if you like;’ said Dai-yu
goodnaturedly. ‘I’m no expert myself, but I dare say I could teach you the rudiments.’
Would you really?’ said Caltrop. ‘Then I’ll be your dis?ciple. But you must promise
not to get impatient with me.’
‘There’s nothing in it really,’ said Dai-yu ‘There’s really hardly anything to learn. In
Regulated Verse there are always four couplets: the “opening couplet”, the
“developing couplet”, the “turning couplet” and the “concluding couplet”. In the two
middle couplets, the “developing” and “turning” ones, you have to have
tone-contrast and parallel?ism. That’s to say, in each of those couplets the even
tones of one line have to contrast with oblique tones in the other, and vice versa, and
the substantives and non-substantives have to balance each other though if you’ve
got a really good, ori?ginal line, it doesn’t matter all that much even if the
tone-contrast and parallelism are wrong.’
‘Ah, that explains it I’ said Caltrop, pleased. ‘I’ve got an old poetry-book that I look
at once in a while when I can find the time, and I long ago noticed that in some of the
poems the tone-contrast is very strict, while in others it’s not. Someone told me the
rhyme:
         For one, three and five
         You need not strive;
         But two, four and six
         You must firmly fix.
and at first that seemed to explain the exceptions. But then I found that in some old
poems even the second, fourth and sixth syllables seemed to have -the wrong tones,
and I’ve been puzzling about it ever since. Now, from what you’ve just said, it sounds
as if these rules really aren’t important after all—that the most important thing is
that the language should be original.’
‘You’ve hit it exactly 1’ said Dai-yu. ‘As a matter of fact even the language isn’t of
primary importance. The really important things are the ideas that lie behind it. If the
ideas behind it are genuine, there’s no need to embellish the language for the poem
to be a good one. That’s what they mean when they talk about “not letting the words
harm the meaning
‘I love that couplet by Lu You,’ said Caltrop:
‘Behind snug curtained doors the incense lingers;
The well-worn concave patch the ground ink settles.
That’s genuine, isn’t it? So vivid.’
‘Good gracious! You mustn’t go reading that sort of stuff!’ said Dai-yu. ‘It’s only
because of your lack of experience that you can think shallow -stuff like that any
good. Once you get stuck into that rut, you’ll never get out of it. You do as I tell you.
I’ve got the Collected Works of Wang Wei here. You take a hundred of Wang Wei’s
pentasyllabic poems in Regulated Verse and read and re-read them, carefully
pondering what you read, until you are thoroughly familiar with them all. After that
read a hundred or two of Du Fu’s Regulated Verse heptasyllabics and a hundred or
two of Li Bo’s heptasyllabic quatrains; then, with a firm foundation of those three
poets inside you, if you go on to look at some of the earlier poets like Tao Yuan-ming,
Xie Ling-yun, Ruan ji, Yu Xin and Bao Zhao, with your quickness and intelligence you
should have no difficulty in turning yourself into a fully-fledged bard within less than
a twelvemonth.’
‘In that case,’ said Caltrop excitedly, ‘dear Miss Lin, would you please lend me that
book you mentioned, so that I can take it back with me and study it before I go to
bed?’
Dai-yu told Nightingale to fetch down the volume of Regular Pentasyllabics from the
Collected Works of Wang Wei.
‘Read the ones I’ve marked with red circles,’ she said, handing the book to Caltrop.
‘They are my own selection. Just work your way through them gradually, taking each
one as it comes. If you have any difficulties, you can either ask Miss Bao about them
or else get me to explain them to you next time you see me.’
Caltrop carried the book back with her to Allspice Court, and sitting down under the
lamp, began reading -the poems, oblivious to all around her. Bao-chai made several
attempts at making her go to bed, but in the end, impressed by such total absorption,
gave up and left her alone.

*

Next morning, just as Dai-yu had completed her toilet, a smiling Caltrop walked in,
holding out the volume of Wang Wei and asking to exchange it for a volume of Du
Fu’s hepta?syllabics.
‘How many of them do you think you can remember? Dai-yu asked her.
‘I’ve been through all the ones marked with red circles,’ said Caltrop.
‘And do you think you have ‘learnt anything from them?’ ‘I think so,’ said Caltrop.
‘Though I can-’t be sure. Perhaps you can tell me.’
‘Certainly,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Discussion is what I was hoping for. it is the only way of
making progress. Tell me what you think they have taught you.’
‘Well,’ said Caltrop, ‘as I see it, poetry is very good at saying things which you can’t
exactly explain but which leave a very vivid impression in your mind; also it often says
things which at first seem illogical but are quite logical and natural when you stop to
think about them.’
‘That sounds very perceptive,’ said Dai-yu. ‘What about giving an example or two of
what you mean?’
‘Take that third couplet from his poem “On the Frontier”,’ said Caltrop:

        ‘Over a lone fire the straight smoke hangs;
        In the long river the round sun sets.

Now how can smoke really be “straight”? And why “the round sun”? Of course the
sun is round! Yet when you close the book and start thinking about those lines, the
scene they de scribe is so vivid that it’s almost as though you had been there. And if
you ask yourself what other two words be could have used instead of “straight” and
“round”, you realize that there aren’t any. Then again, in a couplet from another of
his poems:
         When the sun sets, the water whitens;
         When the tide rises, all the world is green.


“Whitens” and “green” at first seem like nonsense; but when you start thinking
about it, you realize that he had to use those two words in order to describe the
scene exactly as it was. When you read those lines out loud, the flavour of them is so
concentrated that it’s as though you had an olive weigh?ing several -thousand catties
inside your mouth! And there’s another couplet of his:

        Down by the ford the late sun lingers;
        Over the village a smoke-thread climbs.


“Lingers” and “climbs”: so simple, but so clever! I remember that year we came up
to the capital we moored the boat one evening towards dusk in a very lonely stretch
of country with only a few trees on the bank and a few houses far away in the
distance from which the blue smoke of peasants cook?ing their evening meal was
rising high, high into the clouds. When I read this couplet last night, it suddenly took
me back to that very spot.’
Bao-yu and Tan-chun had come in while she was talking and quietly sat down to
listen. Bao-yu was impressed.
‘To judge by what you’ve just said, you don’t need to read any more poetry. The
Emperor Jian-wen once remarked that “appreciation needs not to seek far afield”.
From your dis?cussion of that last couplet, I should say that you have already reached
the samādhi!’
‘Actually, although you won’t know this yet,’ said Dai-yu, ‘that “smoke-thread
climbs” line you admire so much is based on a line written by an earlier poet. If I
show it to you, I think you will agree that it is even more austerely effective than
Wang Wei’s line.’
She took down a copy of Tao Yuan-ming’s Works, hunted out the couplet she had in
mind, and handed it to her to look at:

         Half-lost in haze the distant haunts of men,
         Whose dawdling smoke the unseen hamlet marks.

Caltrop read it and nodded approvingly:
Yes, I see. He got the idea for “climbs” from the “dawd?ling” of this earlier line.’
Bao-yu laughed delightedly.
‘Perfect! You must end your discussion there. If you go on any longer, you’ll begin
unlearning what you’ve already dis?covered. You can start writing poetry yourself
now, straight away. It’s sure to be good.’
‘I can see I shall soon be writing an invitation asking you to join our poetry club,’
said Tan-chun smilingly.
Don’t make fun of me, Miss Tan,’ said Caltrop. ‘Writing poetry is something I’ve
always wanted to do, and now I’ve got the chance, I’m learning for the fun of it. I
don’t expect I shall ever be any good.’
‘Good heavens! we only write for the fun of it ourselves,’ said Tan-chun. ‘You surely
don’t imagine that what we write is good poetry? If we set ourselves up to be real
poets, people outside this Garden who got to hear of it would laugh so loud that
their teeth would drop out!’
‘That’s what Mencius calls “throwing yourself away”,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You shouldn’t
do that. The other day, when I was discussing Xi-chun’s painting with some of
Father’s gentlemen, they told me they had heard about our poetry club and asked if
they could see some of our poems, so I wrote a few out for them from memory. I
assure you, they were genuinely impressed. In fact, they have calligraphed them for
blocks to have them printed.’
‘Is this really true?’ Tan-chun and Dai-yu asked incredu?lously.
‘If anyone’s telling lies, it must be the parrot;’ said Bao-yu.
The two girls were aghast.
‘You really are the limit! Quite apart from the fact that the poems aren’t good
enough, you have no business to go showing our stuff to people outside.’
‘What’s the harm?’ said Bao-yu. ‘If those famous poems written by poetesses in
days gone by had never been -taken outside -the women’s quarters, we shouldn’t
know about them today.’
Just then Xi-chun’s maid Picture arrived and called Bao-?yu away to her mistress.
Caltrop pressed Dai-yu to lend her the volume of Du Fu; she also begged Dai-yu and
Tan-chun to set her a subject for a poem.
‘Let me try my hand at writing one myself,’ she said, ‘-and you can correct it for
me.’
‘Last night there was a very fine moon,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I’ve been thinking of writing a
poem about it myself, but haven’t yet got round to it. Why don’t you write a poem
about the moon? You can use “sky” and “light” as your rhymes; but I won’t set the
other rhyme words for you, you can use whichever ones you like.’
Clutching the volume of poems, Caltrop returned in great glee and at once began
thinking about her composition. After working out the first line or two, she could not
resist peeping at the Du Fu and reading a couple of poems. And in this way she
continued, alternately reading and composing by fits and starts, too excited to think
about eating or drinking or to sit still in the same place for two or three minutes
together.
‘Why give yourself so much trouble when you don’t have to?’ Bao-chai asked her.
‘It’s all that Frowner’s fault. I shall have to go and have it out with her. You are
inclined to be a dreamer at the best of times, but now you are becoming a real case I’
‘Please, Miss Bao I’ said Caltrop. ‘You are putting me off.’ She was writing while she
said this. Soon she had com?pleted the draft of a poem and handed it to Bao-chai to
look at. Bao-chai read it and laughed.
‘No, this is no good. This isn’t the way to write poetry. Still, don’t be disheartened. I
should take it to her just the same and see what she says.’
Caltrop followed her advice and went off to look for Dai?-yu. Dai-yu took the poem
and looked at it. This is what Caltrop had written:

       A chilly radiance bright, a fair round shape,
       The cold white moon hangs in the middle sky.
       The poet for inspiration seeks her oft;
       The homesick traveller from her turns his eye.
       Like a jade mirror hanging on azure wall,
       Like disc of jade suspended from on high.
       No need for lamps on such a glorious night,
    When every beam and post is bathed in light.

Dai-vu smiled.
‘You’ve certainly got some ideas there, but the words you’ve expressed them in
some-how don’t hang together properly. It’s because you haven’t read enough
poetry yet. It looks to me as if you’ve got rather stuck with this poem. If I were you,
I’d abandon it altogether and begin another one. Let yourself go a bit more this time.’
Caltrop returned in silence. This time she did not even go indoors but remained
outside among the trees at the water’s edge—to the considerable mystification of
those who passed by and saw her—sitting on a rock meditating, or squatting on her
heels in order to scratch characters on the ground.
Li Wan, Bao-chai, Tan-chun and Bao-yu, hearing of this interesting sight, stood on a
little hillock some distance away from her and watched with amusement. Bao-chai
insisted that Caltrop had gone mad.
‘You should have heard her last night. She was muttering away to herself until four
or five in the morning. And she can’t have slept for more than half an hour, for as
soon as it was daylight, I could hear her getting up again. She rushed through her
toilet and then rushed off to see Frowner. Pre?sently she came back again, and after
mooning around for half the day, she produced a poem; and as that was no good, I
assume she is now trying to write another one.’
‘“The genius of the place brings out the excellence of the person”,’ said Bao-yu,
misquoting slightly. ‘The -lord above doesn’t give us our talents for nothing. We
always used to say what a pity it was that a person of her qualities should lack
refinement—but look at her now! It proves there is some justice in the world.’
‘If only you had her powers of concentration,’ said Bao-chai, ‘you might study to
some purpose.’
Bao-yu did not reply.
Just then a very pleased-looking Caltrop was to be seen hurrying off in the direction
of the Naiad’s House.
‘Let’s go after her and see if it’s any better this time,’ said Tan-chun.
When the three of them arrived, Dai-yu had the poem in her hand and was already
discussing it.
‘What’s it like?’ they asked her.
‘Well, for a beginner, of course, it’s very good,’ said Dai-yu; ‘but it isn’t really right
yet. It’s too laboured. She’ll have to try again.’
The others asked if they might have a look. This is what they read:

                 Silver or water on the casement cold?
                 See its round source in yon clear midnight sky.
                 Blanched ghostly white, plum-blossoms spread their scent,
                 And dew on willow-slips begins to dry.
                 Is it white powder on the paving spilled?
                 Or grains of frost that on the railings lie?
                 I wake to find no other soul in sight
                 But that still face which through the blind sheds light.
‘It’s not much like a poem about the moon,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but if you altered the
title to “Moonlight”, it would fit rather well. Look at these lines: each of them is not
about the moon, it’s about moonlight. Well, all poetry is only a lot of nonsense! I
should leave it for a few days, Caltrop, if I were you. There’s no hurry.’
But Caltrop, though she had truly believed that this second poem was a minor
masterpiece and was extremely dashed by its rejection, was most unwilling to give
up. She wanted to begin thinking about her next poem straight away; and as she
found the talk and laughter of the cousins distracting, she went out to where the
bamboos began, at the foot of the terrace. There she gave herself up to cogitation of
such fierce intensity that she became totally obvious to all sights and sounds around
her, and when Tan-chun jokingly called to her through the window to ‘call it a day’,
she merely looked up with a somewhat dazed expression and replied that ‘“day”
didn’t rhyme: the rhyme word she was using was “sky”’. The others, hearing this, all
burst out laughing.
‘The girl’s got poetry mania!’ said Bao-chai. ‘This is all Frowner’s doing.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Dai-yu. ‘The Sage tells us that we should be “tireless in teaching
others”, She came and asked me for help. How could I possibly refuse her?’
‘Let’s take her to Xi-chun’s place and get her to look at the painting,’ said Li Wan.
‘Perhaps it will take her mind off poetry for a bit.’
She went outside, the others following, and taking Caltrop by the hand, led her to the
Spring In Winter room of Lotus Pavilion, where they found Xi-chun, fatigued by her
labours, lying on the couch taking an afternoon nap. The painting was on the wall,
masked by a covering of gauze. The cousins woke up Xi-chun and removed the cover
from the painting. Barely three-tenths of it had been completed. Several female
figures were to be seen scattered about here and there in the landscape.
‘Look,’ they said, pointing them out to Caltrop, ‘anyone who can write poetry gets
put into the picture. You must hurry up and learn, so that she can put you in too!’
After chatting and joking for a while, they broke up and went off to their several
apartments.
Caltrop could think of nothing else but her poem. in the evening she sat by the lamp
thinking about it, and it was after midnight when she went to bed. Even in bed she
lay with her eyes wide open, continuing to think about it; and it was not until three
or four in the morning that she gradually dropped off to sleep.
At daybreak Bao-chai woke up and listened: Caltrop ap?peared to be fast asleep.
‘She was tossing about all night,’ thought Bao-chai. ‘I wonder if she managed to
finish her poem. I won’t call her now; she must be exhausted.’
Just then she heard Caltrop laugh and call out in her sleep:
‘Ha! Got it! Let her try saying that this one isn’t any good!’
Bao-chai was both touched and amused.
‘What have you got?’ she asked, quickly waking her. ‘This poetry business is
becoming positively unnatural! I don’t know about learning how to write poetry:
what you’ll likelier get, if you go on much longer in this fashion, is a serious illness!’
The intensity of Caltrop’s application had, in fact, induced a concentration of the vital
fluids which, finding no outlet during the daytime, had resulted in her being able to
produce a whole eight-line poem in her sleep. She wrote it down as soon as she had
combed and washed, and then went out to look for the others.
At Drenched Blossoms, in the little pavilion on the bridge, she came upon Li Wan and
the cousins on the way back from their morning duty-call on Lady Wang. Bao-chai
was just telling them how Caltrop had composed a poem while she was dreaming
and how she had cried out in her sleep, and the others were laughing as they listened.
When they looked up and saw Caltrop herself approaching them, they eagerly asked
her if they might see her poem.
For further details, please see the following chapter.

CHAPTER 49



Red flowers bloom brighter in dazzling snow
And venison reeks strangely on rosebud lips



WHEN Caltrop saw the cousins talking and laughing about her, she came forward,
smiling herself, and handed the poem she was carrying to Dai-yu.
‘See what you think of this one,’ she said. ‘If this one is all tight, I shall go on
learning; if it’s still no good, I shall just have to give up the whole idea.’
The others clustered round Dai-yu to look. This is what they read:

             Ethereal splendour no cloud can blot out!
             Chaste lovely presence of the cold night sky!
             From a white world the washer’s dull thud sounds,
             Till in the last watch cocks begin to cry,
             While, by a fisherman’s sad flute entranced,
             A lady leans out from her casement high;
             And you, White Goddess, lulled in sweet delight,
             Wish every night could be a fifteenth night.
There were exclamations from all of them when they had finished reading it.
‘But this is not just “all right”,’ they said, ‘this is a good and highly original poem. It
shows the truth of the proverb: “Nothing is too difficult for one who has a mind to do
it.” We shall definitely be inviting you now to join our poetry club.’
Caltrop, supposing that they were only saying this to humour her, could not quite
believe them and continued to press Dai-yu and Bao-chai for the truth.
Just at that moment a number of maids and old serving women came hurrying
towards them in a state of great ex?citement:
‘Mrs Zhu! Young ladies! Come and meet you relations! A whole lot of young ladies
and other people we’ve never seen before have just arrived.’
Li Wan laughed.
‘What are you talking about? Whose relations have just arrived?’
There are two young cousins of yours, Mrs Zhu,’ they said, ‘and there’s a young lady
who says she’s Miss Bao’s cousin, and a young gentleman that’s cousin to Mr Xue.
We’re on our way now to fetch Mrs Xue. Why don’t you and the young ladies go on
ahead and meet them?’
They hurried off to complete their mission.
‘It sounds as if my cousin Xue Ke and his sister must have come,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Can
it be them, though?’
‘And it sounds as if my Aunt Li must have decided to bring her two daughters to the
capital,’ said Li Wan. ‘But how strange that they should have arrived together I’
When she and the cousins entered Lady Wang’s main recep?tion room, they found it
packed with people. Apart from the ones whom the servants had mentioned, they
found Lady Xing’s brother’s wife with her daughter Xing Xiu-yan. The three of them,
Lady Xing’s brother and his wife and daughter, had come up to the capital to put
themselves under the protec?tion of Lady Xing. By a coincidence Xi-feng’s brother
Wang Ren was starting out for the capital just as they were plan?ning to set out
themselves, so, on the strength of the marriage connection (Wang Ren being the
brother of Lady Xing’s daughter-in-law), they had elected to travel in his company.
While stopping at one of the canal ports half-way along their route, they had made
the acquaintance of Li Wan’s widowed aunt and her two daughters, Li Wen and Li Qi,
also on their way to the capital, and when it emerged that all of them were
marriage-relations of the Jia family, these three, too, had joined the party. A little
after this, Xue Pan’s cousin Xue Ke had decided to bring his sister Bao-qin to the
capital to attend to the formalities of her betrothal, Some years previously her father,
while temporarily residing in the capital, had prom?ised her to the son of a certain
Academician Mei, but had died before the betrothal could be made formal. Hearing
that his aunt’s kinsman Wang Ren was also on his way to the capital, Xue Ke and his
sister had pushed on ahead to -join him. Thus it was that today all these people
presented themselves simultaneously at the Rong mansion lo6lting for their various
relations.
When at last the introductions and courtesies were over, it became clear that
Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang were delighted with the new arrivals.
I knew something nice was going to happen from the way the lampwick was
behaving last night,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It kept flaring up and then forming into
little balls at the top. You see, I was tight!’
A general exchange of family talk ensued, and the handling over by the visitors of the
presents they had brought with them. After that Grandmother Jia invited them all to
take lunch with her, with wine to celebrate.
Xi-feng, it goes without saying, was now busier than ever. Li Wan and Bao-chai, who
had a great deal of catching up on family news to do, were also kept busy exchanging
informa?tion with their relations about all the things that had hap?pened during the
years since they last met. Dai-yu, observing them, at first shared in their happiness,
but when she began to reflect on the contrast with her own solitary and orphaned
state, she was obliged to go away in order to hide her tears. Bao-yu, well aware of
the reason for her sudden disappearance, went after her, and with a good deal of
coaxing, succeeded at last in comforting her.
As soon as Dai-yu had dried her tears, Bao-yu hurried back to Green Delights to tell
Aroma, Musk and Skybright about the visitors.
‘You ought to go and have a look,’ he told them. ‘This nephew of my Aunt Xue’s is
completely different from Cousin Pan. From his looks and behaviour you’d think he
was Bao-chai’s brother. He’s certainly more like her than Pan is. And as for the
sister—you’re always saying what a beauty Cousin Chai is, but wait till you’ve seen
her! And then there are my sister-in-law’s two cousins—well, words just fail-me!
Heavenly lord, what a store of beauty you must have at your disposal to be able to
produce such paragons! I’ve been like the frog living at the bottom of the well who
thought the world was a little round pool of water. Up to now I’ve always believed
that the girls in this household were without equals anywhere; but now, even
without my needing to go outside, here they come, each one more beautiful than the
last! Today has been an education for me. Don’t tell me there are any more like this:
the shock would be too great!’
He laughed excitedly. Aroma saw that he was in one of his crazy moods and refused
to go and look. But Skybright and the others were more curious and at once hurried
over for a peep. They returned soon after, full of smiles, to report on what they had
seen.
‘Do go and look!’ they urged Aroma. ‘There’s Lady Xing’s niece and this cousin of
Miss Bao’s and Mrs Zhu’s two cousins: it’s not often you get a chance to see four such
beautiful bul?rushes together!’
Scarcely had these words been uttered when a smiling Tan-chun came in looking for
Bao-yu.
‘Our poetry club is in luck,’ she said, finding him indoors with the maids. ‘Think of
all those new members!’
‘Yes,’ said Bao-yu. ‘What a happy inspiration of yours it was to start it! It’s almost as
though providence had sent these people here to make it prosper. But are you sure
they can all write poetry?’
‘I’ve already asked them,’ said Tan-chun. ‘They are too modest to say outright, of
course, but from what I can judge I’m pretty sure that either they all can, or even if
they can’t, would learn very quickly. Look how quick Caltrop has been.’
‘Which of the four do you think is the prettiest, Miss?’ said Skybright. ‘I say Miss
Bao’s cousin.’
‘Yes, I think I agree,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I think even Bao-chai is not quite as beautiful as
her.’
Aroma had been listening to all this with growing curiosity. ‘This is certainly news to
me!’ she said. ‘I shouldn’t have thought it possible to find anyone more beautiful
than Miss Bao. I must go and have a look.’
‘Grandmother was completely captivated as soon as she set eyes on her,’ said
Tan-chun. ‘She’s already insisted that Mother should become her godmother, and it’s
decided that Grandmother shall bring her up as her own grandchild.’
‘Really?’ Bao-yu seemed delighted.
‘When have I ever told you a lie?’ said Tan-chun. There was a glint of mischief in
her eye: ‘Now that she’s got such a beautiful granddaughter, she’ll probably lose
interest in her darling grandson.’
‘That doesn’t matter,’ said Bao-yu unconcernedly. ‘She ought to give preference to
girls. That’s as it should be. By the way, it’s the sixteenth today. It’s the day for our
poetry dub meeting.’
‘Cousin Lin has only recently got up, and Ying-chun is ill again,’ said Tan-chun.
‘We’re not really in any shape for a meeting at the moment.’
‘Ying-chun doesn’t care much about writing poetry any?way,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Surely
we can manage without her?’
‘Yes, but I think we ought to wait a few days, even so” said Tan-chun. ‘Why don’t
we wait until we’ve got to know the newcomers a bit better and then invite them to
join us? I shouldn’t think sister-in-law or Cousin Chai can either of them be much in
the mood for writing poetry at the moment. And Xiang-yun isn’t here. And Frowner
has only just recovered. No one is really up to it yet. We ought to wait until Yun
arrives and the new lot have settled in; then, when Frowner is completely better and
sister-in-law and Cousin Chai are a bit less preoccupied and Caltrop has made some
more progress, we can invite everyone to a plenary session. What you and I ought to
do now is go round to Grandma’s and see what arrangements are being made about
these people’s accom?modation. We know that Chai’s cousin is staying here,
be?cause Grandma has adopted her; but we don’t know yet about the others. If
there are no plans for them to stay here, we must ask Grandma to invite them. If
possible we should get her to let them live in the Garden. It would be fun to have
some more neighbours.’
Bao-yu grew quite radiant at the thought.
‘How clever you are, Tan!’ he told his sister admiringly.
‘I’m such a stupid ass. I get so carried away that I don’t think about the important
things like you do.’
Brother and sister then went together to Grandmother Jia’s apartment, where they
found the old lady in wonderful high spirits following Lady Wang’s recognition of Xue
Bao-quin as her god-daughter. She considered that this entitled her to treat the girl
as her grandchild, which she had begun doing by insisting that she end the nights
with her in her apartment and not in the Garden with Bao-chai. Xue Ke would
naturally stay with his aunt and occupy the study that Xue Pan had vacated.
‘ This niece of yours surely doesn’t need to go back to her parents yet?’
Grandmother Jia said to Lady Xing. ‘Let her stay in the Garden for a few days and
enjoy herself.’
Lady Xing’s brother and sister-in-law had been living in extremely straitened
circumstances, and now that they had come up to the capital, were relying on her to
provide them with accommodation and financial assistance. She was natur?ally only
too delighted to have one less person to her charge, and promptly handed Xiu-yan
over to Xi-feng to dispose of.
Bearing in mind the varied, somewhat peculiar, tempera?ments of the Garden’s
inhabitants, Xi-feng doubted the wis?dom of putting Xiu-yan in with one of the
others; on the other hand she foresaw disadvantages in opening up a separate
establishment for her. In the end she put her in with Ying chun, reflecting that if the
girl did experience any difficulties in -living with Ying-chun, then even if Lady Xing got
to hear of it, she, Xi-feng, could not be held responsible, since Ying-?chun was Lady
Xing’s own half-daughter.
From this time onwards, not counting the time she spent at home with her parents,
Xiu-yan received, for every whole month that she lived with Ying-chun in Prospect
Garden, an allowance from Xi-feng of exactly the same amount as -the monthly
allowance that was paid to Ying-chun herself.
To Xi-feng’s dispassionate eye it soon became apparent that in both temperament
and behaviour Xiu-yan was quite unlike Lady Xing and her parents that she was in
fact an extremely sweet and lovable person. Sorry that so gentle a soul should be so
poor and unfortunate, Xi-feng treated her with a tact and considerateness that she
did not always show the others. Lady Xing, on the other hand, seemed -scarcely
aware of her niece’s existence.
Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang esteemed Li Wan as a good and virtuous young
woman who, having lost her hus?band at an early age, bore widowhood with
fortitude and restraint. Now that this widowed aunt had arrived, they re?fused to
bear of her taking lodgings outside, and though the good lady made many polite
efforts to decline, insisted that she and her two daughters, Li Wen and Li Qi, should
move into Sweet-rice Village and stay there with Li Wan at the family’s expense.
No sooner had the new arrivals begun settling in than news came that Grandmother
Jia’s nephew Shi Ding, the Marquis of Zhong-jing, was being transferred to an
important position in one of the outer provinces and would shortly be leaving for his
new post, taking his family with him. Grandmother Jia could not bear the idea of a
permanent separation from her great-niece, and so it was agreed that Xiang-yun, too,
should move into residence with the Jias. It was Grandmother Jia’s original intention
that Xi-feng should set up a separate establishment for her in the Garden; but as
Xiang-yun herself rigorously opposed this idea and insisted on living with her beloved
Bao-chai, she was allowed to have her way.
The Garden’s society was now larger and livelier than it bad ever been before. With Li
Wan as its doyenne it numbered if you counted Xi-feng as an honorary member
thirteen people: Li Wan, Ying-chun, Tan-chun, Xi-chun, Bao-chai, Dai-yu, Xiang-yun, Li
Wen, Li Qi, Bao-qin, Xing Xiu-yan, Bao-yu and Xi-feng. Apart from the two young
married women, the rest were all fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years old. Most of
them were in fact born in the same year, several of them in the same month or even
on the same day. Not only Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang and the servants, even
the young people themselves had difficulty in remembering who was senior to whom,
and soon gave up trying, and abandoned any attempt at observing the usual
formalities of address.
Caltrop could now think of nothing else all day long but writing poetry. Up to now
she had refrained from importun?ing Bao-chai too persistently for advice, but with
the arrival of an unwearying talker like Shi Xiang-yun upon the scene she was in her
element. Xiang-yun was only too willing to accede to her requests for instruction, and
morning, noon and night the two of them were to be found together, always in
ani?mated discussion.
‘You two are deafening me with your perpetual chatter,’ Bao-chai complained.
‘Imagine how ridiculous and un?maidenly it would seem to a man of letters if he
heard that girls were treating poetry as a serious occupation! Caltrop on her own was
bad enough, but with a chatterbox like you on top of it, Yun, I’m finding it a bit too
much. Everywhere I go it’s “the profundity of Du Fu”, or “Wei Ying-wu of Soochow’s
limpidity”, or “the somewhat meretricious charm of Wen Ting-yun”, or “Li Shang-yin’s
obscurity”. Still, there are two important living poets I’ve so far heard no men?tion
of.’
‘Oh?’ said Xiang-yun, all agog. ‘Which two?’
‘I’ve heard no mention of Crazy Caltrop’s prodigious pertinacity or the linguipotent
loquacity of Shi Xiang-yun,’ said Bao-chai.
The other two burst out laughing.
At that moment Bao-qin arrived. She was wearing a magni?ficent rain-cape that
glittered as she moved with gold and greenish lights. Bao-chai asked her where she
had got it from.
‘Lady Jia gave me it,’ said Bao-qin. ‘She looked it out for me because it was
beginning to sleet.’
Caltrop examined it curiously.
‘No wonder it looks so beautiful: this is woven out of peacock’s down.’
‘ That’s not peacock’s down,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘It’s made from mallard’s
head-feathers.’ She smiled at Bao-qin teasingly:
‘One can see how fond of you she must be. She’s fond of Bao-yu, but she’s never let
him wear this.’
Bao-chai laughed:


‘To each a different fortune meted—

that’s certainly a true saying. I never dreamt that she would be coming here—much
less that when she did, Lady Jia would immediately fail for her like this!’
‘Apart from the time you spend with Her Old Ladyship,’ Xiang-yun advised Bao-qin,
‘I should stick to the Garden as much as possible if I were you. In these two places
you can eat and drink and play anywhere you please. But be careful of Lady Wang’s
place. If she’s in when you go there, then you can sit and talk with her as long as you
like; but if she’s not, it’s best not to go inside. There are a lot of nasty people in there
who like to do us harm.’
This highly indiscreet warning was uttered so matter-of-?factly that Bao-chai, Bao-qin,
Caltrop and Oriole were com?pelled to laugh.
‘I won’t say you are thoughtless,’ said Bao-chai, because you obviously mean well;
but you really are a bit too out?spoken. You and Qin ought to be -sisters, since you
are so concerned about her.’
Xiang-yun looked at Bao-qin appraisingly.
‘She is the only one of us who could wear this cape,’ she said. ‘Anyone else would
look wrong in it.’
Just then Amber walked in with a message from Grand?mother Jia:
‘Her Old Ladyship says please Miss Bao don’t be too strict with Miss Qin; she’s still
only little and should he allowed to have her own way. And she says if there’s
anything Miss Qin wants, she shouldn’t be afraid to ask for it.’
Bao-chai stood up politely to acknowledge the message. Afterwards she nudged
Bao-qin playfully.
‘I don’t know! Some people have all the luck. You’d better leave us, hadn’t you,
before we start maltreating you? It beats me. What have you got that I haven’t got?’
She was still teasing Bao-qin when Bao-yu and Dai-yu arrived. ‘You say that in jest,
Chai,’ said Xiang-yun, noting their entry, but I know someone who really thinks that
way.
‘If anyone’s really upset, it must be him,’ said Amber, pointing her finger at Bao-yu.
Xiang-yun laughed at her simple-mindedness:
‘No, he’s not that sort of person..’
‘Then if it’s not him you mean, it must be her,’ said Amber, pointing now at Dai--yu.
Xiang7yun fell silent. This time it was Bao-chai who spoke:
‘Wrong again. She feels the same way about my cousin as I do. in fact, I believe if
anything she’s even fonder of her; so how could she be upset? Don’t be taken in by
Miss Shi’s nonsense, my dear Amber. When did you ever hear Miss Shi say anything
serious?’
From past experience Bao-yu—who still knew nothing of Dai-yu and Bao-chai’s
recent rapprochement was too fami?liar with Dai-yu’s jealous disposition not to feel
appre?hensive that Grandmother Jia’s new partiality for Bao-qin might upset her. He
was puzzled, therefore, by Bao-chai’s rejoinder, and even more puzzled when he
studied the ex?pression on Dai-yu’s face and found that, far from showing any trace
of the resentment he would have expected, it exactly tallied with what Bao-chai had
said.
‘Those two used not to be like this,’ he thought. ‘Yet to judge from appearances,
they are ten times friendlier towards each other now than they are towards anyone
else.’
Shortly after this he heard Dai-yu calling Bao-qin ‘dear’ and fussing over her as if she
were Bao-qin’s elder sister.
Bao-qin was a young, warm-hearted creature; she was, moreover, highly intelligent
and had been taught her letters from an early age. By the time she had been a couple
of days in the ha household, she had already formed some impression of its members,
Finding that her cousins were quite different from the vapid, giggling creatures to be
found in the women’s quarters of so many houses, she was soon on friendly terms
with all of them and was careful not to show off; but in Dai-yu she recognized a
superior intelligence, and consequently felt even more affection and respect for her
than she did for any of the others. Hence the intimacy which Bao-yu had just
witnessed. He studied the pair of them curiously and marveled in silence.
Shortly after this, when Bao-chai and Bao-qin had gone off to Aunt Xue’s place and
Xiang-yun had gone to see Grand?mother Jia and Dai-yu had gone back to her own
room to rest, Bao-Yu went after Dai-yu to question her.
‘I’ve read The Western Chamber,’ he said, ‘and understood it well enough to have
offended you on more than one occa?sion by quoting it at you; yet there’s one line in
it I still don’t understand. Do you think, if I told you it, you could explain it-to me?’
Dai-yu realized that something must lie behind this request, nevertheless she
smilingly promised that she would do her best.
‘It comes in the section called “Ying-ying’s Reply”,’ said Bao-yu:
            ‘Since when did Meng Guang accept Lang Hong’s tray?

The question seems rather an apposite one. Those two little words “since when”
particularly intrigue me. Kindly ex?pound them for me, will you? Since when did
Meng Guang accept Liang Hong’s tray?
Dai-yu could not but be amused by the droll way in which he had gone about making
his inquiry.
‘That’s a good question,’ she said. ‘It was a good question when Reddie asked it in
the play, and it’s a good question when you ask it now.’
‘There was a time, not so long past, when you might have been deeply offended by
it,’ said Bao-yu, ‘yet now you say nothing.’
‘It’s because now I know she’s a very good person,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Before I used to
think she was two-faced.’
She proceeded to tell him, at some length, about the motherly talking to Bao-chai
had given her after her lapses in the drinking game and about the gift of bird’s nest
and sugar and the long talk Bao-chai had had with her when she was ill.
‘I see,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I needn’t have been so puzzled then. It seems that the
question

             Since when did Meng Guang accept Liang Hong’s tray?
could have been answered with another line from the same act of the same play. It
was since you spoke

    Like a child whose unbridled tongue knows no concealment!

Dai-yu went on to talk about Bao-qin, whom she evidently looked on as a younger
sister. Alas, this only reminded her that she had no real sister of her own and she
began to cry. Bao-yu would have none of this.
‘Now come on, Dai! You’re making yourself upset. Look at you! You’re thinner than
ever this year. It’s because you won’t take care of yourself. You positively look for
ways of making yourself miserable. It’s almost as though you felt you hadn’t spent
the day properly unless you’d had at least one good cry in it!’
‘No,’ said Dai-yu as she wiped her eyes. ‘I feel very low these days, but I don’t think
cry as much as I used to.’
‘I’m sure you do,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s just that it’s become so much a habit with you
that you no longer know whether you’re crying or not. I’m sure you cry just as much
as you always did.’
Just then one of the maids from his room arrived carrying his scarlet felt rain-cape.
‘Mrs Zhu has just sent someone round with a message for you, Master Bao,’ said
the maid.’ She says it’s starting to snow now and she wants to discuss with you about
inviting people for the poetry meeting.’
She had barely finished speaking when Li Wan’s emissary arrived to deliver the same
message to Dai-yu. Bao-yu sug?gested that they should go to Sweet-rice Village
together and waited while she put on a pair of little red-leather boots which had a
gilded cloud pattern cut into their surface, a pelisse of heavy, dark-red bombasine
lined with white fox-fur, a complicated woven belt made out of silvery green shot silk,
and a snow-hat. The two of them then set off together through the snow.
They arrived to find that nearly all the others were there already, mostly in red felt or
camlet snow-cloaks. The exceptions were Li Wan, who wore a simple greatcoat of
plain woollen material buttoned down the front, Xue Bao-chai in a pelisse of
ivy-green whorl-patterned brocade trimmed with some sort of exotic lamb’s wool,
and Xing Xiu-yan, who had no protection against the snow of any kind beyond the
every day clothes she was wearing.
Presently Xiang-yun arrived. She was wearing an enormous fur coat that
Grandmother Jia had given her. The outside was made up of sables’ heads and the
inside lined with long-haired black squirrel. On her head was a dark-red camlet
‘Princess’ hood lined with yellow figured velvet, whose cut-out cloud shapes were
bordered with gold, and round her neck, muffling her up to the nose, was a large
sable tippet.
‘Look, Monkey!’ said Dai-yu, laughing at this furry appari?tion. ‘Trust Yun to turn
the need for wearing snow-clothes into an excuse for dressing up! She looks just like
a Tartar groom!’
‘You haven’t seen what I am wearing underneath yet,’ said Xiang-yun, and opened
out the fur coat to show them.
She had on a short, narrow-sleeved, ermine-lined tunic jacket of russet green,
edge-fastened down the centre front, purfled at neck and cuffs with a triple band of
braiding in contrasting colours, and patterned all over with dragon-roundels
embroidered in gold thread and coloured silks. Under this she was wearing a short
riding-skirt of pale-red satin damask lined with white fox belly-fur. A court girdle of
different-coloured silks braided into butterfly knots and ending in long silken tassels
was tied tightly round her waist. Her boots were of deerskin. The whole ensemble
greatly enhanced the somewhat masculine appearance of her figure with its graceful,
athletic bearing.
The others laughed:
‘She loves dressing up as a boy. Actually she looks even more fetching in boy’s
clothes than she does as a girl.’
‘Let’s get down to business,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘What I want to know is, who’s paying
for the entertainment this time?’
‘Well, this is what I thought,’ said Li Wan. ‘We’ve already passed the date for our
regular meeting, and we don’t want to wait until the next one comes round, because
it’s too far ahead. As it’s snowing, I thought it would be rather nice if we clubbed
together for a little snow-party in honour of the newcomers and used it as an
occasion for doing some poetry-making as well. What do the rest of you think?’
‘I think that’s exactly what we should do,’ said Bao-yu. ‘The only thing is, it’s a bit
late for a party today, but if we wait until tomorrow, the snow may have stopped by
then and it won’t be so much fun.’
‘It’s very unlikely to,’ said the others. ‘And even if it has stopped by tomorrow
morning, it will surely be snowing still tonight, so it should be well worth looking at in
the morning.’
‘This place here is all right, of course,’ said Li Wan, ‘but I thought that for this
occasion it would be nicer if we met in Snowy Rushes Retreat. I’ve already told them
to light the stove there and get the underground heating system started. I don’t think
Grandma would much like the idea of our sitting round the stove making verses, so,
as it’s only a very little party, I propose that we don’t tell her about it. As long as we
let Feng know, it should be sufficient. As regards contributions: if each of you will
bring one tael to me here, it ought to be enough. Not you five;’ she pointed to
Caltrop, Bao-qin, Li Wen, Li Qi and Xiu-yan—‘And Ying-chun and Xi-chun won’t be
contributing either. Ying-chun is ill and Xi-chun is on leave of absence. That leaves
only Bao-chai, Dai-yu, Xiang-yun and Dai-yu. If you four will contribute one tael each,
I will undertake to contribute five or six taels myself. Together that should be ample.’
Bao-chai and the other three promised to bring her their contributions later and
went on to ask what titles and rhymes should be set for the poetry-making.
‘I’ve already decided that,’ said Li Wan. ‘Let it be a surprise for you when you
come.’
Arrangements for the party having now been settled, the cousins chatted together
for a while longer before going off in a body to visit Grandmother Jia.
That concludes the narrative for that day,

*

At first light next morning Bao-yu, who in excited anticipa?tion of the day ahead had
barely slept all night, crawled from the covers and lifted up a corner of the
bed-curtain to inspect the weather. Although the doors and windows were still
fastened, there was an ominous brightness about the latter which led him to
conclude inwardly groaning with dis?appointment that the snow must have cleared
and the sun be shining. Jumping out of bed, he opened one of the inner casements
and looked through the glass. It was not the sun after all, he found, but the white
gleam of snow. It had been snowing all night; there was a good foot of snow on the
ground and it was still coming down in great, soft flakes, I like the flock from a
torn-up quilt.
Overjoyed to find that he had been wrong, he at once began shouting for his maids,
and as soon as he had finished washing and dressed himself in an aubergine-coloured
gown lined with fox, a jacket with a sealskin shoulder-cape, and a belt round his waist
for warmth, he donned his elegant rain-bat and cape (the Prince of Bei-jing’s present
that Dai-yu had so much admired), stepped into his pear wood patterns, and set off
for Snowy Rushes Retreat.
Once outside tile courtyard gate, the Garden stretched out on every hand in uniform
whiteness, uninterrupted except for the dark green of a pine-tree or the lighter green
of some bamboos here and there in the distance. He felt as if he was standing in the
middle of a great glittering crystal bowl. Proceeding on his way, he had just turned a
spur in the miniature mountain whose foot he was skirting, when his senses were
suddenly ravished by a delicate cold fragrance. On looking around him, he found it to
be coming from the dozen or so trees of winter-flowering red plum growing inside
the walls of Green Bower Hermitage where the nun Adamantina lived. The brilliance
of their carmine hue against the white background and the bravura of their
blossoming amidst the snow so enchanted him that he stopped for some minutes to
admire them.
As he moved on again, he saw someone carrying a green oiled-silk umbrella crossing
over Wasp Waist Bridge. It was one of Li Wan’s servants on her way to invite Xi-feng
to the party.
Arriving at Snowy Rushes Retreat, be found several women-servants outside,
sweeping a pathway up to the door.
Snowy Rushes Retreat was built at the water’s margin in the shelter of a little hill. It
had a thatched roof and adobe walls and a post-and-bar fence round it and
bamboo-barred windows, just like a farmhouse or a peasant’s cottage. By merely
opening a casement and leaning out, it was possible to fish in the lake from its rear
windows. Reeds and rushes grew all around it. A meandering pathway through them
led to the bamboo bridge by which Lotus Pavilion could be approached from the
back.
When the snow-sweepers caught sight of Bao-yu in his rain hat and cape, they
paused from their labours and laughed.
‘We were just saying a moment ago that all we need now is an old fisherman, and
here he comes! You’re too impatient, Master: the young ladies won’t be coming until
they’ve eaten.’
Hearing that, there was nothing for Bao-yu to do but go back again.
Looking out from Drenched Blossoms Pavilion while he was crossing over the bridge,
he caught sight of his sister Tan-chun emerging from Autumn Studio. She was
wearing a dark-red camlet cloak and Guanyin hood and leaning on the arm of a little
maid. A woman-servant walked behind her carrying a green oiled-silk umbrella.
Realizing that she must be on her way to see Grandmother Jia, Bao-yu waited by the
pavilion for her to catch up with him and accompanied her out of the Garden.
When they arrived, Bao-qin was still at her toilet in the inner room. The other cousins
joined them shortly after. Bao-yu kept telling everyone how hungry he felt and
grumbling because the servants were so long in serving. When the food at last
arrived, the first dish to be put on the table was unborn lamb stewed in milk.
‘That’s a health food,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It’s for old folk like me. I’m afraid you
young people couldn’t eat it. It’s a creature that’s never seen the light. There’s some
fresh venison today, though. Why don’t you wait and have some of that?’
The others agreed to wait, but Bao-yu professed himself unable to hold out, and
helping himself to a bowl of plain boiled rice, poured a little tea over it and shovelled
it straight from the bowl into his mouth with one or two collops of pickled
pheasant-meat to help it down.
‘I know you’ve got something on today,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘That’s why you’ve
no time to eat properly.’ She turned to the servants. ‘Save some of the venison for
them to eat in the evening.’
‘There’s plenty more,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’ve already spoken to them about it.’
Xiang-yun had a brief consultation on the subject with Bao-yu:
‘If they’ve got fresh venison, why don’t we ask for a piece and cook it ourselves in
the Garden? That would be fun.’
Bao-yu eagerly took up her suggestion and begged a piece from Xi-feng. He got one
of the women to take it into the Garden for them.
Presently, when they had all left Grandmother Jia’s place and reassembled in Snowy
Rushes Retreat an-d were waiting to hear what themes and rhymes Li Wan had
decided on, they noticed that Xiang-yun and Bao-yu were missing.
‘Those two should never be allowed together,’ said Dai-yu. ‘As soon as ever they get
together there is some kind of mischief afoot. No doubt the reason they’ve gone off
this time is because they have designs on that deer’s meat.’
Just then Li Wan’s aunt, Mrs Li, came in, drawn by the noise and numbers to see
what was happening.
‘That boy with the jade and the girl with the gold kylin,’ she said to Li Wan anxiously,
‘they both seem such clean, well-bred children, and they look as if they had enough
to eat, yet just now the two of them were discussing how to eat a piece of raw
venison. They seemed to he quite serious about it, too. Can one eat venison raw? I
find it hard to believe that it can be very good for you.’
‘Shocking I’ exclaimed the others. ‘Better go out and stop them.’
‘Yun is at the bottom of this,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Mark my words!’
Li Wan hurried off to find the culprits.
‘If you are proposing to eat raw meat,’ she said when she had found them, ‘I shall
have to send you back to Grandma’s to do it there. You can take a whole deer and
stuff yourselves sick on it as long as it’s not my responsibility. Come on, now! Come
back and make verses with the rest of us. Out in all this snow—it’s much too cold!’
‘You’re absolutely mistaken,’ said Bao-yu, laughing. ‘We’re planning to roast it.’
‘Oh well’ said Li Wan, ‘that’s different.’
Some old women arrived just then, carrying an iron stove, some metal skewers and a
grill.
‘Now be careful about cutting that meat,’ said Li Wan. ‘If you cut your fingers, you’ll
have nobody to blame but yourselves I’
Having uttered that warning, she went indoors again.
Not long after she had gone in, Patience came by on her way to the Retreat. Xi-feng
had sent her, in response to Li Wan’s invitation, to explain that she was unable to join
them because she was busy seeing to the various annual payments that fall due at
this time of year. Xiang-yun stopped her to exchange greetings, and having once
stopped her, was unwill?ing to let her go again. Patience was by nature a fun-loving
girl and she knew that Xi-feng would generally let her do as she liked. Considering the
idea of cooking outdoors a great lark, she entered into the spirit of the thing, and
taking off her bracelets, joined the other two round the brazier and asked for three of
the cut-up pieces of venison to roast.
Bao-chai and Dai-yu had seen this kind of thing before and were not particularly
interested, but it was a novelty to Mrs Li and Bao-qin and the newcomers, and they
were greatly intrigued.
‘What a lovely smell!’ said Tan-chun, when she and Li Wan had finished discussing
the theme for the verse-making. ‘You can smell it from here. I’m going outside to
have some.’
She went out to join the three around the brazier. Li Wan followed her.
‘Everyone’s ready and waiting,’ said Li Wan. ‘Haven’t you two finished eating yet?’
‘I need wine to inspire my verse,’ said Xiang-yun, speaking with a mouth full of
venison, ‘and eating roast venison gives me a thirst for wine. So if I didn’t eat this
venison, I shouldn’t be able to write any poetry for you.’
She caught sight of Bao-qin, in the beautiful drake’s head cloak that Caltrop had
thought was made of peacock’s feathers, hanging back somewhat from the rest and
smiling wistfully.
‘Thoppy!’ she called out to her. ‘Come and try thome!’
‘Too dirty!’ said Bao-qin.
‘Go and try some,’ Bao-chai urged her. ‘It’s very good. The only reason your Cousin
Lin isn’t having any is because she’s delicate and can’t digest it. If it weren’t for that,
she would love to have some herself.’
Hearing this, Bao-qin went over and nibbled a bit, and finding it good, began to tuck
in with as much gusto as the rest.
Presently a little maid arrived from Xi-feng summoning Patience to return; but
Patience told the girl to go back without her and tell her mistress that she was being
detained by Miss Shi. Shortly after the maid’s departure Xi-feng herself arrived, with
a rain-cape over her shoulders.
‘This looks good,’ she said jovially. ‘You might have told me!’
With that she joined the other five in their alfresco feast round the brazier
‘You look like a party of down-and-outs,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Oh dear, oh dear! Poor Snowy
Rushes Retreat, polluted by Butcher Yun and her reeking carnivores! I weep for you!’
‘What do you know about it?’ said Xiang-yun scornfully. ‘“True wits make elegant
whate’er they touch.” Yours is a false purity. Odious purity! Now we may reek and
raven; but presently you will see us with the pure spirit of poetry in our breasts and
the most delicate, silken phrases On our lips!’
‘You’d better see to it that the verses you make are good ones,’ said Bao-chai,
laughing, ‘otherwise we shall make you expiate the pollution by plucking the venison
from your in?sides and stuffing you with snowy rushes!’
They had now made an end of eating, and washed their hands. In putting on her
bracelets again, Patience noticed that one of them was missing; but though she and
the others looked all around them, they were unable to find it. They were still
puzzling over its disappearance when Xi-feng smilingly put an end to the search:
‘I know where the bracelet’s gone. You others go in and get on with your poetry.’
‘There’s no need to look for it any longer,’ she told Patience. ‘You will have to go
home without it; but I promise that within three days from now you shall have it
back again.’
‘What are your poems to be about this time ?’ she asked the cousins. ‘Grandma
says that as it’s getting near the end of the year, we shall soon be needing some First
Month lantern riddles.’
‘Ah yes, of course!’ they said. ‘We’d quite forgotten, We’d better make some good
ones up in advance to have ready for the festival.’
During this exchange they had been trooping into the room in the Retreat which had
the under-floor heating. Wine-cups and prepared dishes had been laid there in
readiness by the servants. A paper stuck to the wall announced the theme, form and
rhyme for the forthcoming poetry contest. Bao-yu and Xiang-yun, who had not yet
seen it, quickly went over to look. This is what it said:

             Theme: The Snow
             Form:  Linked Pentameters
             Rhyme: Eyes

No order of composition had been indicated.
‘I’m not much good at poetry myself,’ said Li Wan, ‘so I shall merely start you off by
giving you the first three lines. After that, whoever is the first to think of a good
following line can carry on.’
‘I think we ought to have a fixed order,’ said Bao-chai. As to whether or not her
advice was taken, that will be made clear in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 50

Linked verses in Snowy Rushes Retreat
And lantern riddles in the Spring In Winter Room



‘I THINK We ought to have a fixed order,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Just let me write the names
down and we can decide what it is to be by lot.’
When she had written down their names and torn up the paper, the slips were drawn
and she copied them down in the order in which they came out. Li Wan, by
coincidence, re?tained the first place.
‘If this is what you are doing,’ said Xi-feng, ‘I may as well contribute a line of my
own to start you off with.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said the others. ‘Please do!’
Bao-chai added the name ‘ Feng’ to the list, above that of ‘Farmer Sweet-rice’, while
Li Wan explained what the subject was and what sort of line it had to be. Xi-feng
listened attentively and thought for some moments before speaking.
‘You mustn’t laugh if this sounds a bit unpolished,’ she said at last, ‘but at least I
think it’s the right length. Mind you, I’ve no idea how it could go on.’
‘Never mind how unpolished it is,’ they said. ‘just tell us what it is; then you can
leave, if you want to, and get on with your own work.’
‘Well, when it snows, there’s always a north wind,’ said Xi-feng, ‘and last night I
could hear the north wind blowing all night long; so I’ve made a line up about that:

             Last night the north wind blew the whole night through.

There you are—take it or leave it!’
The others ‘looked at each other in pleased surprise.
‘Even if the language of this line is a bit unpolished and you can’t see what’s going
to follow it, it’s exactly the kind of line that a skilled poet would begin with. Not only
is the line good in itself, but it leaves so many possibilities open to the person who
follows. Put that down for our first line then, Sweet-rice, and you can finish the
couplet.’
Before they proceeded any further, however, Xi-feng, Mrs Li and Patience drank two
cups of wine with them, after which they left. As soon as they had gone, Li Wan
wrote out the line that Xi-feng had given them, adding a line of her own to make it
into a couplet and a third line after that to make the beginning of a second couplet.
Thereafter, as each of them in turn completed the couplet started by the previous
person and then added the first line of another couplet, she continued to write down
the lines at their dictation:
XI-FENG:
Last night the north wind blew the whole night through—
LI WAN:
Today outside my door the snow still flies.
On mud and dirt its pure white flakes fall down—
CALTROP:
And powdered jade the whole earth beautifies.
Flakes on the dead plants weave a winter dress—
TAN-CHUN:
And on dry grasses gemlike crystallize.
Now will the farmer’s brew a good puce fetch—
LI QI
His full barn to a good year testifies.
The ash-filled gauge shows winter’s solstice near—
LI WEN:
And the Wain turns as Yang revivifies.
Snow robs the cold bills of their emerald hue—
XIU-YAN:
And frost the river’s motion petrifies.
Snow settles thickly on sparse willow boughs—
XIANG-YUN:
But on dead plantain-leaves less easy lies.
Now perfumed coals in precious braziers burn—
BAO-QIN:
And heavy furs the girls’ slim shapes disguise.
Firelight the mirror by the window catches—
DAI-YU:
And burning nard the chamber purifies.
Still sobbing through the night the mournful wind—
BAO-YU:
Each sleeper’s dreams with sadness sanctifies.
Somewhere a melancholy flute is playing—
BAO-CHAI:
Whose sad notes with the wind’s plaint harmonize.
With groans the Earth Turtle sideways shifts his load—

At this point Li Wan laid down her brush and rose to her feet.
‘I think I’ll just slip out and see about getting some more wine heated. Someone
else can take my place.’
Ban-chai took up the writing-brush and called on Bao-qin to complete the couplet;
but before she could do so, Xiang-?yun had leapt to her feet with two lines of her
own:

XIANG-YUN:
As dragons brawl, the cloud-wrack liquefies.
A lone boat from the lonely shore puts out—
Nothing daunted, Bao-qin completed that couplet instead:

DAO-QIN:
While from the bridge a horseman waves good-byes.
Now warm clothes to the frontier are dispatched—
Xiang-yun would yield to no one; and her invention was so much quicker than
anyone else’s, that they were content to let her break the order, and watched with
amusement as she returned now, exulting, to the attack:

XIANG-YUN:
And wives to distant dear ones send supplies.
On still untrodden ways masked pitfalls threaten—
‘That’s a good line!’ said Bao-chai admiringly as she wrote down what Xiang-yun
had recited; and she followed with two lines of her own:

BAO-CHAI:
In snowbound woods a bough’s creak terrifies.
The wind-blown snow around the traveller whirls—
Dai-yu hurriedly followed:

DAI-YU:
And clouds of powdery snow at each step rise.
Steamed taros makes a good snow-party fare—
She nudged Bao-yu to follow: but Bao-yu was so absorbed in watching the contest
that seemed to be developing between Xiang-yun on the one hand and Bao-qin,
Bao-chai and Dai-yu on the other, that he was failing to think up lines of his own to
follow their half-couplets with. He did the best he could, how?ever, in response to
Dai-yu’s nudge:

BAO--YU:
The guests on ‘scattered salt’ themes improvise.
Now is the woodman’s axe no longer heard—
Clear off, you—you’re no good!’ said Xiang-yun, laugh?ing. ‘All you’re doing is getting
in other people’s way!’
Her pausing to say this gave Bao-qin an opportunity of cut?ting in:

BAO-QIN:
Yet still his rod the straw-clad fisher plies.
Mountains like sleeping elephants appear—

Xiang-yun hurried back into the fray:

XIANG-YUN:
A snake-like path the climber’s skill defies.
After long cold the trees strange frost-fruits bear—

This evoked admiring murmurs from Bao-chai and the rest.
Tan-chun managed to get in a contribution at this point:

TAN-HUN:
Which, bold in beauty, winter’s blasts despise.
The hushed yard startles to a cold chough’s chatter—

Xiang-yun was ready at once with two lines to follow, but as she was feeling thirsty,
she first stopped to gulp down some tea. In doing so, she lost her turn to Xiu-yan:

XIU-YAN:
An old owl wakes the vale with mournful cries.
The driving flakes make angles disappear—

Xiang-yun put down her teacup in a hurry, before more ground could be lost:

XIAN-G-YUN:
But dimples on -the water’s face incise.
In the clear morn how radiant gleams the snow!—

Dai-yu followed:
DAI-YU:
How ghostly, as the too short daylight dies!
Its cold the Chengs’ disciples could withstand—

Xiang-yun laughed excitedly as she hurried to complete the couplet:

XIANG-YUN:
Its promise can a king’s cares exorcise.
Who’d lie abed all stiff with cold indoors—

Bao-qin laughed, too, as she followed:

BAO-QIN:
When friends invite to red-cheeked exercise?
Who o’er the land the menfolk’s silk unrolls—?

Xiang-yun quickly capped this:

XIANG-YUN:
Who the white weft from Heaven’s loom unties?

But before she could begin another couplet, Dai-yu slipped in a line of her own:

DAI-YU:
Tall tiled pavilions cold and-empty stand—

Xiang-yun capped it:

XIANG-YUN:
Snug thatch more favour finds in poor men’s eyes.

Bao-qin, concluding that this was now a free-for-all, -cut in with the next half couplet:

BAO-QIN:
Ice lumps we thaw and boil to make our tea Xiang-yun, having evidently thought of
something amus?ing, began to giggle:

XIANG-YUN:
The fuel being damp, they greatly tantalize.

Dai-yu began to giggle too:

DAI-Y-U:
The Zen recluse with non-broom sweeps the ground—

The infection of giggles had now reached Bao-qin:

BAO-QIN:
His stringless lute-play still more mystifies.

Xiang-yun was by now so doubled up with laughter that the others could not make
out the words of her next line.
‘What? ‘they asked her. ‘What was that you said?’ Xiang-yun had to repeat it:

XIANG-YUN:
On the stone tower a stork unwatchful sleeps—

Dai-yu was laughing so much that -she had to clutch painfully at her chest and the
words she recited came out in a laughing shout:

DAI-YU:
On the warm mat a cat contented sighs.

All the lines that followed were uttered in rapid succession and to the
accompaniment of much laughter.

BAO-QIN:
In moonlit caves the silvery water laps—

XIANG-YUN:
And red flags flutter against sunset skies.

DAI-YU:
Soaked winter plums make the breath fresh and sweet—


‘That’s a good line,’ said Bao-chai. She capped it herself:
BAO-CHAI:
And melted snow the wine-fumes neutralize.

BAO-QIN:
The stiffened aigrette gradually thaws—

XIANG-YUN:
The snow-soaked silken girdle slowly dries.

DAI-YU:
The wind has dropped, but snow still wetly falls—

Bao-qin capped this, laughing:

BAO-QIN:
And frequent drips the passer-by baptize.

Xiang-yun had collapsed, weak with laughing, upon Bao-chai’s shoulder. The others
had long since given up trying to participate and become mere laughing spectators of
the three-cornered contest between Xiang-yun, Dai-yu and Bao-qin. Dai-yu urged
Xiang-yun to go on.
‘Don’t tell me you’ve run out of inspiration—! Surely your famous gift of the gab is
still good for a few more lines?’
Bao-chai prodded Xiang-yun, who was now laughing help?lessly upon her lap.
‘See if you can exhaust the rhyme, Yun. If you can do that, I shall be really
impressed.’
‘This isn’t verse-making,’ said Xiang-yun, raising her head from Bao-chai’s lap, it’s
more like a duel to the death!’
‘Well, whose fault is that?’ they asked her, laughing.
Tan-chun, having decided that she would be unlikely to make any further
contributions herself had some time before this taken over the task of amanuensis
from Bao-chai. She now pointed out -that the poem needed finishing off. Li Wan,
who had just arrived back, took the paper from her and embarked on a suitable
finishing couplet:

LI WAN:
Our verses shall this happy day record—
Her cousin Li Qi completed it:

LI QI
And a wise Emperor loyally eulogize.


‘Now that’s enough;’ said Li Wan. ‘We still haven’t exhausted the rhyme, but if we
go on any longer, we shall be tying ourselves up in knots trying to use words that
aren’t really suitable.’
They now went over the whole poem from beginning to end and discussed it all in
detail. It appeared that Xiang-yun had contributed far mote lines than anyone else.
The others laughed.
‘It’s because of all that venison you ate!’
‘ If we consider quality rather than quantity,’ said Li Wan, ‘I think all the
contributions are of about equal merit. Except Bao-yu’s, of course. He goes to the
bottom of the list, as usual.’
‘I can’t do Linked Verses, anyway,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You have to make allowances for
me.’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Li Wan, smiling, ‘but we can’t make allowances for you at
every single meeting. One time you’re in trouble because we have fixed rhymes,
another time you fail to turn up altogether, and this time you tell us you “can’t do
Linked Verses “I think this time there really has to be a penalty. I noticed just now
that the red plum in Green Bower Hermitage is very fine. I’d like to have broken off a
branch to put in a vase, but I find Adamantina such a difficult person that I prefer not
to have anything to do with her. The first part of your punishment shall be to get us a
branch of that red plum and put it in a vase here where all of us can admire it.’
‘What a delightful penalty!’ said the others. ‘How civil?ized!’
Bao-yu, too, was delighted with the penalty, but just as he was setting off to perform
it, Xiang-yun and Dai-yu simul?taneously rose to their feet and detained him.
‘It’s very, very cold outside. Have a cup of hot wine before you go.’
Xiang-yun already had the wine-kettle in her hand. Dai-yu found an extra large cup
for her to pour the wine in.
‘There!’ said Xiang-yun, filling it up to the brim. ‘If you come back empty-handed
now, after drinking our wine, we shall double the rest of your penalty when you get
back!’
Bao-yu quickly drank down the proffered cup of freshly heated wine and walked out
into the snow. Li Wan wanted to send a servant out after him, but Dai-yu intervened.
‘I wouldn’t, if I were you. If he has anyone else with him, he won’t be able to get
any.’
Knowing Adamantina, Li Wan reflected that this was probably true and nodded. She
sent the maids to fetch a large mei?ping vase with wide shoulders and a very narrow
neck to put the plum-blossom in when it arrived.
‘When he comes back, we must compose some red plum poems,’ she said.
‘I can do one now,’ said Bao-qin.
‘Oh no!’ said Bao-chai. ‘We’re not letting yon do any more. You’ve already hogged
enough turns for today. It’s no fun for the others if they are left with nothing to do.
No, it’s Bao-yu’s penalty we’ve got to think about, He said just now that he can’t do
Linked Verses. When he comes back we ought to make him do some other kind of
verses for us by himself.’
‘Good ideal’ said Dai-yu. ‘And I’ve got another idea. Several people didn’t get
sufficient opportunity in the Linked Verses of showing what they can do. I propose
that those who contributed least in the Linked Verses should be given the red plum
poems to do?
‘Yes, I agree,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Cousin Xing, Cousin Wen and Cousin Qi were
practically crowded out altogether—and they are, after all, our guests. Qin and Yun
and you, Frowner, hogged nearly all the turns. This time the rest of us ought to keep
out of it and let Cousin Xing and Cousin Wen and Cousin Qi have the floor to
themselves.’
‘Qi isn’t very good at making verses,’ said Li Wan. ‘I think you’d better give her place
to your cousin Bao-qin.’
This was scarcely what Bao-chai had intended, but she felt herself in no position to
dissent.
‘Why don’t we use the words “red plum flower” as rhymes?’ she suggested. ‘Each
of the three can do an octet on “Red Plum Flower”, but Cousin Xing can use “red” for
her rhyme, Cousin Wen can use “plum” for hers, and Qin can use flower”.’
‘We seem to be letting off Bao-yu,’ said Li Wan. ‘I can’t agree to that.’
‘Give him a separate theme,’ Xiang-yun suggested.
‘What theme shall we give him?’ the others asked.
‘What about “On Visiting the Nun Adamantina with a Request for Red Plum
blossom”?’ said Xiang-yun. ‘That might be interesting.’
‘Oh yes!’ said the others. ‘That would do splendidly.’
At that very moment the object of their discussion walked in, smiling triumphantly,
with a flowering plum-branch in his hand. The maids at once relieved him of it and
put it in the waiting vase, while the cousins crowded round them to admire it.
‘I hope you enjoy it, all -of you,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It took me enough trouble to get!’
Tan-chun handed him a cup of hot wine to revive him; but first the maids removed
his cape and rain hat and shook the snow off them.
Maids from several different apartments now began arriving with extra-clothing for
their mistresses. Bao-yu’s Aroma sent him an old surtout lined with fox’s belly-fur. Li
Wan made the
servants fill three dishes, one with extra large steamed taros, the other two with
blood-oranges, yellow Canton oranges and olives, to take back to her.
Xiang-yun now told Bao-yu the title of the poem they wanted him to compose and
urged him to begin thinking a bout it.
‘I will,’ said Bao-yu; ‘but there’s just one thing I would ask of you all: please let me
use my own rhymes ; please don’t make me do it to set rhymes.’
‘All right,’ said the girls. ‘Use whatever rhymes you like.’ They had been admiring
the plum-blossom meanwhile. The vertical part of the branch—the part, that is,
which was stuck into the neck of the vase—must have been less than two feet high;
but growing at right-angles from the top of it was a side branch which rose and fell in
a spreading cascade of blossom all of four feet long. Of the branchlets forming this
flowery cascade

some were like writhing serpents,
some were like frozen worms;
some were as straight and smooth as a writing-brush,
some were as densely twigged as a tiny coppice.

As for the blossoms, they had

A colour like the rosy lips of love
And scent that made summer’s scents seem uninviting.

While the others-were studying the blossoming branch and praising its beauties, Xing
Xiu-yan, Li Wen and Bao-qin were busy composing their poems about it and
presently began writing them out for the others to inspect.
This is what the others were now able to read:

On a Branch of Red Plum Flower

I
Rhyming ‘red’                                   By Xing Xiu-yan

So brave, so gay they bloom in winter’s cold,
Before the fragrant peach and almond red;
Like rosy clouds that clothe the springtime slopes
Of Yu-ling, where my dream-soul oft has sped.
Each little lamp in its green calyx lies
Like drunken snow-sprite on a rainbow bed.
Yet do these flowers, of hue so rich and rare,
Reckless, in ice and snow their charms outspread.

II
Rhyming ‘plum’                          By Li Wen
What richness blooms before my drunken eyes?
’Tis not the white I sing, but the red plum.
See, its pale cheeks are streaked with blood-red tears,
Even though its bitter heart with cold is numb.
No flower this, but a fairy maid transformed
And here transplanted from Elysium
In this bleak North it makes such brave display,
I’ll tell the bees that spring’s already come.

III
Rhyming ‘flower’          By Xue Bao-qin

Like spendthrift youths in spring’s new fashions dressed,
Its bare thin branches burst in glorious flower.
Snow no more falls, but a bright rosy cloud
Tints hills and streams in one long sunset hour.
Through this red flood my dream-boat makes its way,
While flutes sound chill from many a maiden’s bower.
Sure from no earthly stock this beauty came,
But trees immortal round the Fairy Tower.

They read these poems with smiles of pleasure. There were words of praise for all
three of them; but Bao-qin’s, they finally agreed, was the best of the three. Bao-yu,
realizing that she was the youngest present, was greatly impressed. Dai-yu and
Xiang-yun between them poured out a tiny cupful of wine and offered it to her in
celebration of her victory.
‘All three were equally good,’ Bao-chai deprecatingly.
‘It was you two who in the past were always fooling me that poems were the best.
Now, it appears, you’ve found someone else to fool.’
‘What about you?’ Li Wan asked Bao-yu. ‘Is yours ready yet?’
‘I did have one ready,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but these three are so much better that reading
them has made me nervous and put it completely out of my mind. You’ll have to give
me a bit longer while I think up another.’
Xiang-yun picked up one of a pair of large bronze chop?sticks used as tongs for
feeding the stove with and beat a preliminary tattoo with it on her metal
hand-warmer.
‘I’ll drum for you;’ she said ‘If you can’t produce something each time the
drumming stops, we’ll double your penalty.’
‘I think I’ve got something,’ said Bao-yu. Dai-yu picked up a writing-brush, ‘I’ll write
it down for you while you recite it,’ she said. Xiang-yun struck up a tattoo.
‘Right!’ she said presently, as she stopped her drumming. ‘End of first round.’
‘Yes, I’ve got something,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Get ready to write.’

             ‘Wine not yet broached nor verses yet composed—’

Dai-yu wrote down the words, shaking her head as she did so.
‘That’s a very indifferent beginning.’
‘Come on!’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Hurry!’ Bao-yu continued:

        ‘In quest of spring I sped to Elysium—

Dai-yu and Xiang-yun nodded.
‘Hmn. Not bad.’
Bao-yu went on:

             “Twas not the balm from Guanyin’s vase I craved
             Across that threshold, but her flowering plum—,

Dai-yu -shook her bead again as she wrote this down.
‘That’s a bit contrived, isn’t it?’
Xiang--yun began-another tattoo on the hand-warmer. When she finished, Bao-yu
continued at once:


‘A frozen worldling, for red flowers I begged;
The saint cut fragrant clouds and gave me some.
Pity my verse so angular and thin,
For convent snow has soaked it to the skin!’

As soon as Dai-yu had finished writing this down, Xiang-?yan and the rest began a
critical discussion of the whole poem. They were till in the midst of this when a little
maid dashed in to announce that Grandmother Jia was approaching. Bao-yu and the
girls hurried out, laughing and chattering, to welcome her.
‘She must be feeling in good spirits,’ they said, ‘to come out in the snow like this.’
Grandmother Jia was still quite a way off when they saw her. She was sitting in a little
bamboo carrying-chair and holding a green silk umbrella over herself. A large cape
and squirrel-lined hood almost completely enveloped her. Faithful, Amber and three
or four other maids, all carrying their own umbrellas, formed a little escort around
the chair and its bearers. Li Wan and the others would have gone out into the snow
to meet her, but Grandmother Jia called out to them to stay where they were.
‘Wait there under cover. I’ll come over to you..’
‘ I’ve given Feng and your Aunt Wang the slip,’ she told them, chuckling
mischievously, when the chair had reached them and they were helping her out of it.
It’s all right for me, going out in all this snow, because I’m sitting in this thing; but I
didn’t want them trudging along in the snow beside me, get?ting cold and miserable.’
Some of them relieved her of her snow-clothes while others supported her on either
-side and conducted her into the room where the heated kang was.
‘What pretty plum-blossom!’ she said as they entered it. ‘You children certainly
know bow to enjoy yourselves. I feel quite angry with you for not inviting me!’
Li Wan made the servants bring in a big wolfskin rug and spread it out in the middle
of the kang for Grandmother Jia to sit on.
‘Now you just all go on enjoying yourselves exactly as you were before I came,’ said
the old lady when she had settled herself on the rug. ‘I daren’t sleep after lunch at
this time of year, because the days are so short. I had a little game of dominoes
instead; then I started wondering what you were all up to and thought I would come
over and join you.’
Li Wan handed her a hand-warmer while Tan-chun fetched a winecup and a pair of
chopsticks, poured out a cup of warm wine, and offered it to her with both her hands.
Grandmother Jia accepted it from her and sipped the wine.
‘What have you got in that dish over there?’ she asked them.
‘Pickled quails,’ said one of the cousins, bringing the dish over for her inspection.
‘That will do very nicely,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Tear off a little leg for me, will
you?’
Li Wan called for water, and having first washed her hands, performed the operation
for her in person.
‘Now I want you all to sit down again and go on talking,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It
does me good to hear you. —You too,’ she said to Li Wan. ‘You’re to sit down as well.
I want you to behave exactly as if I hadn’t come. Otherwise I shall go away again.’
At this the others resumed their former places—all except bearers turned into this
and put the chair down just inside it for Grandmother Jia to get out. Xi-chun was
already waiting there to welcome her and conducted them all through the covered
way which ran round the sides of the courtyard from the gateway to her living
quarters at the back. A framed board hanging underneath the eaves announced the
name of the building:

SPRING IN WINTER.



Servants held up the red felt portiere for them as they approached its doorway. They
could feel the hot air fanning their cheeks as they entered it.
Grandmother Jia tackled Xi-chun as soon as they were in?side, not even waiting to sit
down.
‘What’s happened to the painting?’
‘The glue gets tacky in this cold weather,’ said Xi-chun. ‘It stops the paint from going
on properly. I’ve put the painting away because I was afraid it might get spoiled.’
Grandmother Jia brushed aside this excuse with a dis?missive laugh.
‘I want that painting ready by the end of the year. Don’t be so lazy! Fetch it out at
once and get on with it, my girl!’
Just then a smiling Xi-feng made her appearance. A purplish woollen gabardine was
thrown loosely over her shoulders.
‘You’ve led me a fine dance,’ she grumbled, ‘sneaking off on your own like this!’
The old lady was delighted to see her.
‘I didn’t want you all catching colds; that’s why I told them not to let you know I
was going out. I suppose I ought to have realized that that sharp little nose of yours
would soon ferret me out again. You mustn’t think you are being dutiful in tracking
me down like this.’
‘Being dutiful!’ said Xi-feng. ‘That’s not at all the reason why I came out to look for
you. Just now when I went round to your apartment I found it all deathly quiet, and it
was quite clear from the maids’ answers, when I tried to find out where you had
gone, that they didn’t want me to go into the Garden to look for you. That aroused
my suspicions; and when a moment later a couple of nuns appeared on the scene,
my suspicions were confirmed: I realized that they must have come to make their
annual collection for some charity or other and that my dear, saintly Grannie, who no
doubt has rather a lot of subscriptions to pay out at this time of year, had gone into
hiding to avoid them. I asked the nuns, and sure enough it was for your annual
subscription that they had come. I paid it for you myself. So now your creditors have
gone, you can come out of hiding. You ought to be getting back now in any case.
You’ve got some nice, tender pheasant for dinner and if you leave it much longer it
will spoil.’
All this was spoken, of course, to the accompaniment of much laughter from the
others. Before Grandmother Jia could say anything in reply, Xi-feng had ordered the
bearers to bring up the bamboo carrying-chair and Grandmother Jia, in laughing
acquiescence, took Xi-feng’s hand, got back into it, and was at once lifted up and
whisked away by the bearers. The others followed after, chattering and laughing as
they went.
As they emerged from the east end of the alley-way into the silvery snowscape of the
Garden, they could see Bao-qin, identifiable by the glossy green mallard-cape,
standing a long way off behind the shoulder of a little hill, waiting for the rest of
them to arrive. A maid, hugging a large vase with a branch of red plum in it, was
standing behind her.
‘So there she is!’ said the others. ‘We thought there seemed to be two of us
missing. And she’s got herself some plum ?blossom, as well.’
Grandmother Jia smiled proprietorially at the distant figure.
‘What does that remind you all of, seeing her there on that snowy bank, wearing a
cape like that and with the spray of plum-blossom behind her?’
‘Why,’ they said, ‘it’s like that painting by Qiu Ying you have hanging in your room:
“The Beauty of the Snow”.’
Grandmother Jia shook her head.
‘No, the girl in that picture isn’t wearing a cape like that—and she isn’t half as
pretty as Qin, either.’
Just at that moment a third figure, previously invisible, stepped out from behind
Bao-qin’s back. Whoever it was was wearing a red felt snow-cape.
‘Which of the girls is that?’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘There aren’t any more girls; we’re all here,’ said the others laughing. ‘That’s
Bao-yu.’
‘My eyes are getting worse and worse,’ said Grandmother Jia. Soon they had caught
up with the three figures on the hill and she could see that it was indeed Bao-yu
whom she had failed to recognize with Bao-qin and the maid.
‘ I’ve been over to Green Bower Hermitage again,’ Bao-yu told the girls.
‘Adamantina ended up by giving me a branch of plum-blossom for each of you. I’ve
just been arranging to have them delivered to your rooms.’
The others thanked him for his kindness.
Talking as they went, they presently passed through the gate of the Garden and
accompanied Grandmother Jia back to her apartment. After dinner, while they were
still sitting there in conversation, Aunt Xue arrived.
‘What a heavy fall of snow!’ she said. ‘I haven’t been able to come over and see
you all day long. You ought to go out and have a look at it, Lady Jia, if you are feeling
low. It would do you good.’
‘Who said I was feeling low?’ said Grandmother Jia with some amusement. ‘I’ve
only just got back from visiting the children. I’ve been having a fine old time!’
‘Oh?’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Yesterday evening I was intending to ask if my sister and I
could have the use of the Garden today so that we might arrange a little
snow-viewing party for you, but you’d already gone to bed, and Bao-chai said that
you were feeling out of Sorts, so I thought I’d better not bother you. If I’d known
differently, I’d have come round this morning and invited you.’
‘We’re only just into the eleventh month,’ said Grand?mother Jia. ‘There’ll be
plenty more snow yet and plenty more opportunities for taking advantage of your
kind offer.’
‘I do hope so,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘It’s something I should very much like to do for you.’
‘Isn’t there a danger you might forget, Aunt?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Why not weigh out fifty
taels now and leave them with me? Then next time it snows, I can get it all ready for
you. That would save you the trouble of arranging it yourself and also avoid the
danger of your forgetting.’
‘In that case you and I might just as well split the money between us,’ said
Grandmother Jia. ‘Next time it snows, all I have to do is say that I’m feeling out of
sorts, and you won’t have to do anything at all. That way Mrs Xue will have even less
trouble, while you and I will each of us have twenty-five taels cleat profit.’
Xi-feng clapped her hands delightedly.
‘What a wonderful idea! Why didn’t I think of it myself?’
The others laughed.
‘Shameless hussy!’ said Grandmother Jia, laughing with the rest. ‘You’re-like the
monkey on the pole: give you an inch and you take an ell. What you ought to have
said is: “No, Aunt, you are our guest Since you honour us by staying in our house, it is
we who should be inviting you. We can’t allow you to go spending money on us.”
That’s what you ought to have said; not asked your poor aunt for fifty taels. Whoever
heard of such a thing!’
‘She’s a canny old lady, this Grandma of ours,’ Xi-feng explained to Aunt Xue. ‘She
watches you first to see if you’ll weaken or not. If you’d weakened and coughed up
the fifty taels, she’d have been quite willing to go halves with me and pocket
twenty-five of them herself; but having gauged that you probably won’t, she adopts a
holier-than-thou attitude and makes an example of me, even though she was the one
who suggested it. All right, all right. I’ll pay for the whole party myself, and when
Grandma arrives, I’ll have fifty taels out of my own savings wrapped up all ready to
give her as a present. That shall be my punishment for having opened my big mouth
and occupied myself with other people’s affairs.’
Bao-yu and the girls were by this time rolling about on the kang.
Presently, when the conversation got round to what a beautiful picture Bao-qin had
made standing in the snow with the spray of plum-blossom behind her, Grandmother
Jia began inquiring about her parentage and the exact day and hour of her birth.
Aunt Xue guessed that she was considering her as a possible match for Bao-yu. She
would have been glad enough to go along with this had not Bao-qin already been
promised to the Meis; however, since Grandmother Jia had not asked her outright,
she could do no more than hint at a prior attach?ment.
‘She’s been very unlucky, poor child. The year before last her father died quite
suddenly. She used to go with him every-where on his travels, so she has seen a great
deal of the world for one so young. Her father was a great one for combining
business with pleasure. He always took the family with him when he went away on
business. They would spend perhaps a whole year in one province, seeing all the
sights; then the next six months they might spend travelling around in another. At
one time and another they must have covered well over half the provinces of the
Empire in that way. While he was on one of his trips to the capital, he promised her
to Academician Mei’s boy, but unfortunately it was in the year after that he died, so
nothing could be done about it. And now her poor mother has gone down with a
consumption...’
Xi-feng interrupted, sighing and stamping her foot in an exaggerated display of
disappointment.
‘Oh, what a shame! I was just going to offer my services as a match-maker, but it
seems that she’s already betrothed.’
Who did you have in mind?’ Grandmother Jia asked her. ‘Never you mind!’ said
Xi-feng. ‘I’m sure they would have made a very good pair; but since she’s already got
someone else, there doesn’t seem any point in discussing it.’
Grandmother Jia knew very well whom Xi-feng had in mind, but hearing that Bao-qin
was already spoken for, she dropped the subject and made no further mention of it.
The company talked for a while longer before breaking-up; but of the rest of that day
and the night which followed our narrative supplies no account.

*
Next day the snow had cleared. After lunch Grandmother Jia told Xi-chun that, cold
or no cold, she must get on with the painting as quickly as possible.
‘If you really can’t get it finished by the end of the year,’ she said, ‘it doesn’t matter.
But what you must do is get Bao-qin with the maid and the branch of plum-blossom
into it. I want you to do that straight away; and they are to be painted exactly as they
looked when we saw them on that bank yester?day.’
Xi-chun said that she would, though miserably aware that she would find doing so
extremely difficult. Later, when the others went round to her place to see how she
was getting on, she was pondering gloomily over this latest problem. Li Wan
somewhat heartlessly proposed that they should leave her to her own thoughts and
carry on their conversation without her.
‘When we got back from Grandmother’s last night,’ she said, ‘Qi and Wen and I
were unable to get to sleep, so we lay in bed making up riddles. I made up two using
quotations from the Four Books and the other two each made up one.’
‘Ah yes, that’s what we all ought to be doing,’ said the others. ‘Tell us your four first
and we’ll try to guess the answers.
‘Guan-yin lacks a biography,’ said Li Wan. ‘The answer is a phrase from the Four
Books.’
                    ‘Resting in the highest good,’
Xiang-yun promptly suggested.
‘What’s that got to do with “biography”?’ said Bao-chai.
‘Try again,’ said Li Wan.
‘I know,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Isn’t it

             ... though good, yet having no memorial?’


‘Ah yes, that must be it,’ said the others.
‘What is the green plant that grows in the water?’ said Li Wan.
‘That just has to be
                     ‘It is a fast-growing rush,’

said xiang-yun. ‘I don’t see how that ‘could be wrong.’
‘Good for you!’ said Li Wan. ‘Now here is Wen’s riddle:

             Beside the rocks the water runs cold.

It’s the name of an historical person.’
‘That must be “Shan Tao”,’ said Tan-chun. ‘His surname means “mountain”—that’s
the “rocks”—and “Tao” means “billows”
‘Right,’ said Li Wan. ‘Now Qi’s riddle is just a single word:

                       Firefly

The answer is a single- word, too.’
They all puzzled for a long time over this without being able to think of any answer. It
was Bao-qin who finally came up with the solution.
‘Yes, I see. It’s rather involved. The answer is “flower” isn’t it?—I mean the flower
that grows.’
Li Qi acknowledged smilingly that this was correct.
‘What has “flower” got to do with “firefly”?’ the others asked her.
Bao-qin explained:
‘In the Record of Rites it says
              Corrupt grass by transmutation breedeth fireflies.
Now the character for “flower” is written with “grass” at the top and “change”—or, if
you     like,     “transmutation”—under?neath.        So      “corrupt    grass  by
transmutation”—which, accord?ing to the Rites, produces fireflies—makes the
character for “flower
The others laughingly acknowledged that the riddle was an ingenious one.
‘All four of these riddles are very good,’ said Bao-chai, ‘but I don’t think they are
quite the sort of thing that Lady Jia had in mind. I think we ought to make up some
about fairly easy, everyday objects, so that those of us who aren’t quite so learned
can enjoy them as well.’
Xiang-yun thought for a bit.
‘I’ve got one,’ she said presently. ‘It’s in the form of a “Ruby Lips” stanza:

             Far away
         From the high fell
         Where I used to dwell
         Amidst men I play.
         But for what gain?
         My labour’s vain;
         My tale is hard to tell.’

No one was able to make out what this could be. After puzzling for a long time, they
produced a number of different guesses. Someone thought it was ‘a monk’; someone
else thought it was ‘a Taoist’; a third person suggested that it might be ‘a marionette
player’.
‘You’re all wrong,’ said Bao-yu, who had been grinning silently to himself while the
others guessed, ‘I’ve thought of the answer. It’s “a performing monkey”.’
‘That’s it” said Xiang-yun.
‘We can understand the first part all right,’ said the others; ‘but what about the last
line? What’s that supposed to mean?’
‘Have you ever seen a performing monkey that hadn’t had its tail docked?’ said
Xiang-yun.
Groans and laughter.
‘Trust Yun’s to have a frightful pun in it—as if the riddle wasn’t hard enough
already!’
‘Mrs Xue was telling us yesterday that you’ve travelled a lot and been to all sorts of
interesting places,’ Li Wan said to Bao-qin. ‘With so much material you ought to be
just the person for making up riddles—especially as you’re so good at verse-making
as well. Why don’t you make up a few, and the rest of us will try to guess them?’
Bao-qin said nothing, but smiled and nodded, and at once went off into a corner to
think.
Bao-chai had now composed a riddle, too, and recited it for them to try and guess
while Bao-qin was doing her thinking.

                 ‘Tier upon compact tier of fragrant wood:
                 No craftsman’s hand could carve one half so well.
                 A gale blows all about the temple’s eaves,
                 Yet, though it shakes, no sound comes from my bell.’

While the others were still trying to guess the answer to this, Bao-yu recited one that
he had just completed himself:

                 ‘’Twixt heaven and earth amidst the clouds so high
             Bamboo gives warning to the passer-by.
             Eyes strain some feathered traveller to descry
                 Who’ll bear my answer back into the sky.’

Dai-yu also had one ready, and proceeded to recite it to them:
             ‘See my little prancing steed!
             Of silken rein he has no need,
             Round the city wall he goes,
            Wreaking havoc on his foes.
            At his master’s touch he moves
            With thunder of advancing hooves.
            In isles by tortoises supported
            His deeds are honourably reported.’
Tan-chun, too had composed a riddle, but as she was on the point of reciting it,
Bao-qin came back from her corner to announce that she had finished.
‘I’ve been visiting places of historical interest ever since I was little,’ she said, ‘so I
really have seen quite a lot. What I’ve done now is to choose ten of them, mostly
associated with some famous person or other, and make up a poem about each one.
The verses themselves may sound rather like doggerel, but the point about them is
that, as well as commemorating these famous places and people, each of them
contains hidden references to some common object which you have to guess.’
‘Ah, that sounds very ingenious!’ they said. ‘But why not write them down, so that
we can take our time thinking about them?’
What happened next will be related in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 51

A clever cousin composes some ingenious riddles
And an unskillful physician prescribes a barbarous remedy

WHEN Bao-qin explained that the riddles she had composed were in the form of
quatrains, each containing a clue to some well-known object, about famous places
she had visited in the course of her travels, the cousins were greatly impressed, and
waited with eagerness for her to copy them out. This is what they read when she had
finished doing so :

Red Cliff
             The river at Red Cliff was choked with the dead,
             And the ships without crew carried naught but their names.
             A clamour and shouting, a wind took the blaze,
             And a host of brave souls rode aloft in the flames.

*
Hanoi
             His column of brass bade the nations obey:
             The noise of him spread through barbarian parts.
             Brave Ma Yuan to conquest and empire was born:
             He needed no Iron Flute to teach him those arts.

*
Mt Zhong-shan
           Though ambition had never been part of your nature
           And the call from retirement was none of your choosing,
           You danced in the end at another’s commandment,
           So you can’t be surprised if we find it amusing.

*
Huai-yin
             The brave must beware of the vicious dog’s bite:
             The gift of a throne on your fate set the seal.
             Let us learn from your story the humble to prize,
             And due gratitude show for the gift of a meal.
*
Guang-ling
             Your crows and cicadas no more you shall hear
             By the old Sui embankment back home in the South;
             But the scandalous story of those wanton times
             Wags in many an idle, unsavoury mouth.

*
Peach Leaf Ford
            In the waters a scene of decay is reflected;
            Long since from its bough did the last peach-leaf fall.
            Your old Southern mansion has tumbled in ruins,
            And only your likeness looks down from the wall.

*
Green Mound
          The Amur’s black flood for pure grief is arrested;
          The frozen string twangs with a heartbroken sound;
          And, deploring the harsh rule that ordered this exile,
          A few crooked trees bow in shame to the ground.

*
Ma-wei
            The sad, ravaged face seemed to shine in its sweat;
Then soon that sweet softness all vanished away.
            Yet something remained, for the well-known perfume
            In the clothing she wore lingers on to this day.

*
The Monastery at Pu-dong
           Young Reddie was ever a light, empty creature,
           Always to-ing and fro-ing in all kinds of weather.
           Though her Mistress in ire hung her up from the ceiling,
           Those two had already been walking together.

  *
The Plum-tree Shrine
            ‘’Twill be by the willow and not by the plum.’
            But who is it there will her likeness discover?
            Let not her full moon make you think that Spring’s coming,
            For the cold parts her now till next year from her lover.

After reading these poems, the cousins all praised the re?markable ingenuity with
which they had been constructed. Only Bao-chai was critical:
‘The first eight of these poems have historically verifiable subjects, but what about
the last two? I’m afraid I don’t quite understand what they are about. I think you
ought to make up another two to replace them with.’
‘Don’t be so stuffy, Chai!’ said Dai-yu. ‘Talk about “gluing the bridges of the zither”!
It’s true that the subjects of those last two poems can’t be found in the history books,
but how can you say that you don’t know what they are? Even if, as well-bred young
ladies, we may not read the books in which they are to be found, we’ve all watched
plenty of plays. Every three-year-old child is familiar with these stories. It’s sheer
hypocrisy to pretend that you’ve never heard of them.’
‘Hear, hear!’ said Tan-chun.
‘In any case,’ said Li Wan, ‘she has actually been to the places associated with the
stories, even if the stories them?selves are unhistorical. Stories pick up all kinds of
circum?stantial detail in the course of centuries of re-telling. Sooner or later some
know-all invariably equips them with a location in order to fool more people into
believing them. I remember on my journey here when I first came up to the capital
we visited three or four different sites all claiming to be the burial-place of Guan Yu.
Now no one doubts that Guan Yu actually existed or that he actually did the heroic
things he is supposed to have done; but he can’t have been buried in more than one
grave. Obviously the tradition that he was buried in those places was invented by
people—living long after Guan Yu’s death who loved and admired Guan Yu and all
that he had stood for and wanted to claim him for themselves. And if you look in. the
Geographical Gazetteer, you’ll find that it isn’t only Guan Yu who has graves in several
different places: practic?ally all the famous men who ever lived appear to have been
buried in more than one place. And when it comes to sites which are famous because
of people who never even existed, they are still more numerous. It may well be that
the people those last two poems are about didn’t exist; but though the stories about
them are unhistorical, they are certainly well-known. You can hear them told -by
story-tellers; you can see them acted on the stage; you can even find references to
them on the divination-sticks that people tell their fortunes with in temples. There
can’t be a man, woman or child who isn’t familiar with them. And even if one knows
them from the books, it can hardly be said that to have read a few lyrics from The
Western Chamber or The Soul’s Return is tantamount to reading pornography. No, I
see no harm in these two poems. I think she should leave them as they are.’
This, coming from Li Wan, effectively silenced Bao-chai’s objection.
Some time was now spent in trying to guess answers to the riddles concealed in
these poems, but all of their guesses were wrong.
The days in winter are very short and in no time at all, it seemed, they were trooping
back into the mansion for their dinner. While they were there, a message arrived for
Lady Wang to say that Aroma’s brother, Hua Zi-fang, had come and was waiting
outside in the front.
His mother is seriously ill and has been asking to see Aroma,’ said the messenger. He
asks if, as a special kindness, you will allow her to go home and see her.’
‘We shouldn’t dream of preventing a mother from seeing her daughter under such
circumstances,’ said Lady Wang. ‘Of course she may go.’
She called for Xi-feng and, having explained the situation to her, left it to her to
decide what arrangements should be made for Aroma’s departure. Xi-feng promised
to attend to the matter and hurried back to her own apartment to do so. She told
Zhou Rui’s wife to break the news to Aroma about her mother. She also gave detailed
instructions for the visit.
‘Get hold of another of the women in your group to go with you as second
chaperone. And take two of the junior maids with you as well. And you’ll want four of
the grooms from the front. Take responsible ones: not too young. Tell them you’ll
need two carriages, one large and one small. You two can sit in the larger one with
Aroma, and the two maids can go in the smaller one.’
Zhou Rui’s wife was on the point of going off to execute these orders, but Xi-feng had
evidently not finished.
‘Aroma’s a girl who doesn’t like fuss. You’d better tell her that it’s my wish that she
should dress herself up in the very best things she’s got. Tell her to take a good big
bundle of extra clothes with her as well. The cloth it’s wrapped in is to be of the
highest quality. Her hand-warmer is to be a good one, too. And tell her that before
she goes I want her to come here so that I can have a look at her.’
Zhou Rui’s wife went off to do her bidding. In due course Aroma herself arrived,
dressed up in all her finery. She was accompanied by Zhou Rui’s wife and the other
woman and by two little maids, one carrying her bundle and the other one her
hand-warmer. Xi-feng proceeded at once to inspect her, begin?ning at the top.
Aroma’s hair, liberally studded with pearled and golden jewellery, was satisfactory;
her clothing, it seemed, less so. She had on an ermine-lined silk tapestry dress of
peach-pink satin, sprigged with a pattern of different sorts of flowers, a leek-green
padded skirt embroidered in couched gold thread and coloured silks, and a black
satin jacket lined with squirrel.
‘I see. These are all things that Her Ladyship gave you. That’s good. But the jacket is
too plain. And it’s not warm enough for the time of year, either. You want something
with a heavier fur in it.’
‘This is the only one she gave me,’ said Aroma, ‘and the only other one I’ve got is
lined with ermine. She promised me one with a heavier fur in time for the New Year,
but I haven’t been given it yet.’
‘I’ve got one with a heavier fur which I haven’t worn be?cause the trimmings don’t
suit me,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’d been meaning to get it altered, but I could let you have it
now if you like and you can give it back to me to have altered when Her Ladyship gets
this other one made that she’s promised you. We’ll call it a loan.’
The servants laughed.
‘You like to have your little joke, Mrs Lian. All the year round you’re handing things
out on the quiet that Her Lady?ship has overlooked, yet you never ask her for any
thing back for them. Why so stingy all of a sudden about a little old jacket?’
‘Her Ladyship can’t be expected to remember everything,’ said Xi-feng, ‘and these
are, after all, rather trifling matters. Of course, someone has to think about them, for
the sake of appearances. Even if it leaves me a bit out of pocket, I’ve got to see that
everyone is dressed decently. If that gets me a reputation for being generous well,
that’s just one of the hardships I must learn to put up with! It would be much worse
to have everyone going around looking like tramps. Think of the jokes I should hear
about my housekeeping then!’
‘ There can’t be many like you, Mrs Lian,’ said the women admiringly, ‘so
considerate towards Her Ladyship and yet at the same time so thoughtful towards us
servants. You really do think of everything.’
While they were praising her, Xi-feng was already ordering Patience to fetch the
jacket she had mentioned. It had in fact arrived from the tailor’s only a day or two
previously. It was a very grand one, in slate-blue satin, with eight large,
embroidery-like silk tapestry roundels woven into it, and with a lining of arctic fox.
After giving Aroma the jacket, Xi-feng inspected her bundle. The carrying-cloth was of
silk gauze in a nondescript black-and-white pattern, lined with strawberry?coloured
silk. All she had got wrapped up in it were a couple of padded dresses, by no means
new, and her other fur-lined jacket. Xi-feng told Patience to fetch a better
carrying-cloth-one made of a good-quality foreign broadcloth and lined with
turquoise-coloured silk—and a snow-cape to add to the con?tents of her bundle.
Patience went off to get them. When she came back she was carrying not one
snow-cape but two: one of them, in dark-red felt, showed signs of wear; the other, in
dark-red camlet, seemed to be almost new.
Aroma protested.
‘I can’t possibly take both of these,’ she said. ‘Even one of these would seem a bit
on the grand side for me.’
‘Just pack the felt one,’ said Patience. ‘You can carry the other one on your arm and
on your way out get someone to take it over to Miss Xing. Yesterday when we had
that heavy snow there were ten or a dozen of them all wearing felt or camlet
snow-capes. They made quite a picture in their red capes against the background of
white snow. She was the only one there who hadn’t got one. She looked all
hunched-up with the cold, poor thing: I felt really sorry for her. Let her have the
camlet one.’
‘See how liberal she is with my possessions,’ Xi-feng expostulated jokingly. ‘Heavens,
girl, I give enough away already without needing you to help me!’
‘Like mistress, like maid,’ said the woman who had spoken before. ‘It’s because you
yourself are so considerate towards Her Ladyship and so kind to us servants that she
feels free to behave in that way. If you were a mean. tight-fisted sort of person, she’d
never dare.’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘I suppose you could say that she understands me a bit—about thirty per cent
perhaps!’
She turned back to Aroma to deliver her parting in?structions.
‘We must hope that your mother recovers, but if by any chance she doesn’t, you
will obviously have .to stay on for a bit. Let me know, in that case, and I’ll have your
bedding sent on to you. Don’t use their bedding or any of their toilet things.’ She
turned to Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘You know our rules, don’t you? I don’t need to go over
them again.’
‘Yes, ma’am,’ said Zhou Rui’s wife. ‘All their people are to keep away from us while
we are there, and if we stay they have to give us one or two inside rooms to
ourselves.’
With that she accompanied Aroma outside and called to the pages to fetch lanterns,
for it was already getting dark. The little party then made its way to the carriages,
and having dis?posed themselves inside them, were driven off to Hua Zi?-fang’s
house, where our story leaves them.

*

Back at the mansion Xi-feng summoned two of the nannies from Green Delights.
‘I doubt very much whether Aroma will be coming back for a day or two,’ she told
them. ‘You’d better tell whichever two of the senior maids you think are most
reliable to be on call at night in Bao-yu’s room while she is away. And keep an eye on
things yourselves. See that he doesn’t get up to mischief.’
The two women went off, saying that they would attend to the matter, and a little
later came back to report on what they had arranged.
‘We’ve put Skybright and Musk on night-call in his room. There are always four of
us outside, of course. We take it in turns to be on duty throughout the night.’ Xi-feng
nodded.
‘See that he goes to bed early and doesn’t get up too late.’
The old women promised, and went back into the Garden.
Not long after this Zhou Rui’s wife returned with the mes?sage that Xi-feng had been
half expecting: Aroma’s mother had already breathed her last and Aroma would be
unable to come back. Xi-feng went off to report this news to Lady Wang. She also
sent someone into the Garden to collect Aroma’s bedding and toilet things. Bao-yu
stood by and supervised, while Skybright and Musk got them ready.
When Aroma’s things bad been despatched, the two girls removed their hair
ornaments and changed into their night-clothes. Skybright showed no disposition,
after changing, to remove herself from the clothes-warmer over which she was
crouched.
‘Now don’t start acting the young lady,’ said Musk. ‘I advise you to stir yourself a
bit.’
‘I’ll stir myself soon enough when you are out of the way,’ said Skybright. ‘As long as
you are around, I might as well take it easy.’
‘Now come on, there’s a good girl!’ said busy Musk. ‘I’ll make his bed and you can
put the covet over the dressing-mirror and fasten the catch. You’re taller than I am.’
She bustled off and began making up Bao-yu’s bed.
‘Hail’ said Skybright disgustedly. ‘Just as I was beginning to get warm!’
Bao-yu, who up to that moment had been sitting apart, abstractedly wondering
about Aroma’s mother (he had still not been told of her death), chanced suddenly to
catch this remark. At once he got up, went into the next room, and attended to the
dressing-mirror himself,
‘Carry on warming yourself,’ he said with a smile to Skybright as he came in again,
‘I’ve done it for you.’
‘I don’t think I shall ever get warm,’ said Skybright. And I’ve just remembered: I
haven’t brought in the hot-water bottle.’
‘How thoughtful we are all of a sudden!’ said Musk. ‘He never has a hot-water
bottle. And we shan’t need one tonight. It’ll be much -warmer in here on the
clothes-warmer than it is on the kang in the other room.’
‘You’re not both going to sleep on the clothes-warmer, are you?’ said Bao-yu. ‘I
shall be scared, all on my own in the closet-bed with nobody near me. I shan’t be
able to sleep.’
‘Well, I’m sleeping on the clothes-warmer at all events,’ said Skybright. ‘Let Musk
sleep beside the closet-bed.’
The time was well after nine. Musk, who had by this time let down the curtains,
moved the lamp to its night-time position, and lit the slow-burning incense, now
helped Bao-yu into bed and tucked him up. After that she and Skybright themselves
settled down for the night, Skybright on top of the clothes-warmer and Musk outside
the curtains which separ?ated the alcove of the closet-bed from the rest of the room.
Some time in the middle watch of the night Bao-yu called out for Aroma a couple of
times in his sleep and, not getting the customary response, woke up. Awake he
remembered, with some amusement, that Aroma was not there to answer. The noise
he made had woken Skybright, who called out from where she lay to Musk.
‘Musk! He’s even woken me up, over here. Do you mean to say you really haven’t
heard anything, lying there right beside him? You must sleep like a corpse!
Musk turned over and yawned.
‘He was calling for Aroma; what’s it got to do with me? What do you want?.’ she
asked Bao-yu.
‘I want some tea,’ he said.
Musk hopped out of bed to get him some. She was wearing only a quilted red silk
tunic.
‘You’ll get cold,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Put my fur gown on.’ She picked up the winter
dressing-gown that lay always ready beside him, in case he should need to get up
during the night. It was lined with the orange-yellow chest fur of pine-martens and
had a big fur collar. Slipping the gown over her shoulders, Musk first washed her
hands in the basin, then she poured him a cup of hot water and held the spittoon for
him to spit into when he had washed his mouth out. After that she took a teacup
from the shelf where the tea-things were kept, rinsed it out with hot water, and filled
it from a pot in a padded wicker case in which ready-brewed tea was kept warm for
such emergencies. Having ministered to Bao-yu’s wants, she rinsed her own mouth
out with the hot water and poured half a cup of tea out for herself.
‘Musk,’ Skybright called out to her, ‘give us a drop too, there’s a dear!’
‘What a nerve!’
‘Go on!’ said Skybright. ‘Tomorrow night you can lie back all night long and let me
wait on you.’
Musk held out the spittoon, as she had done for Bao-yu, while Skybright rinsed her
mouth out, then fetched her half a cupful of tea.
‘Don’t go to sleep yet, you two,’ she said, as soon as Sky?bright had been attended
to. ‘Keep talking while I go outside for a hit.’
‘There’s a ghost waiting for you out there,’ said Skybright. ‘There’s no ghost out
there, but there’s a very fine moon,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Go ahead: we’ll keep talking, don’t
worry!’
He coughed significantly.
Musk opened the door and lifted up the felt portière. There was, as Bao-yu had
predicted, a beautiful moon outside. As soon as she had gone out, Skybright slipped
down from the clothes-warmer and tip-toed after her, intending to give her a scare.
Physically the hardiest of the maids and, as a rule, the one who was least afraid of
the cold, she went as she was, with nothing but a short tunic to cover her. Bao-yu
tried to dis?suade her from going out.
‘I wouldn’t, if I were you. If you catch cold, it won’t be quite so funny.’
But Skybright motioned impatiently to him to be quiet and crept out of the door.
The .moonlight outside was like water. Suddenly she heard the wind. It was only a
brief, faint gust, but the chill of it penetrated to the marrow of her bones and made
her shudder.
‘It’s certainly true what they say about a warm body fearing the wind,’ she reflected.
‘This cold is really no joke.’
She was still determined to frighten Musk; but just as she was about to do so, Bao-yu
called out in a loud voice from indoors.
‘Careful Musk! Skybright’s outside.’
Immediately Skybright ran in again.
What an old woman you are!’ she said. ‘The shock wouldn’t have killed her.’
‘I wasn’t thinking about that,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I was worried about your catching cold;
and besides, if she’d called out when you startled her she might have woken
somebody up, and you know what it would have been like then. They’d never have
believed it was a practical joke, they’d have said, “Just look, Aroma only away for a
single night and already the girls in his room are seeing things. Not one of them’s to
be trusted.” Come on, come over here and tuck this quilt in for me.’
Skybright went over to arrange his bedding. While she was doing so, she stuck one of
her hands inside the cover and held it against his skin.
‘Your hand is freezing!’ he said. ‘I told you you’d get cold.’ He noticed how red her
cheeks were and put out his hand to touch them. They were as cold as ice.
‘Quick, you’d better get inside here and warm up,’ he said. Just as she did so, there
was a loud bang and Musk rushed giggling into the room, slamming the door behind
her.
‘Whew, what a shock I’ she said. ‘I thought I saw someone crouching down in the
shadows behind the rockery. Actually it was that long-tailed pheasant. I was just
going to cry out, when it heard me coming and flew up into the light, so that I could
see what it was. If I’d lost my head and started scream?ing, I might have woken
everybody up.’
She said this while washing her hands. Presently she finished washing and laughed.
‘Did you say Skybright had gone outside? I wonder why I didn’t see her. I bet she
went outside to scare me.’
‘What’s this lump here then?’ said Bao-yu. ‘She’s down in here getting warm. She
did go outside. If I hadn’t called out when I did, she would have scared you.’
‘She doesn’t need me to scare her, silly little goose!’ said Skybright, laughing, from
inside the bedclothes. ‘By the looks of it she’s perfectly capable of scaring herself!’
She emerged from Bao-yu’s bedding now and crossed the room to the
clothes-warmer to get inside her own. Musk gazed at her incredulously as she did so.
‘Is that all you were wearing when you went outside, that circus rider’s outfit
you’ve got on now ?’
‘That’s all she was wearing,’ said Bao-yu.
‘You’ll die before your time!’ said Musk. ‘What, standing around with only that on?
It’s enough to freeze the skin off you!’
She took the copper cover off the brazier and damped down the glowing charcoal by
shovelling some ash on to it with the fire shovel. Before replacing the cover, she
threw on a couple of pieces of agalloch to sweeten the air. Then she went behind the
screen and trimmed the lamp up. After that she too went back to bed.
The effect on Skybright of the sudden change of tempera?ture was to make her
sneeze. Bao-yu groaned.
‘I told you so. You have caught a cold.’
‘She was complaining that she -didn’t feel too good when we got up this morning,’
said Musk, ‘and she hasn’t eaten properly all day. Yet instead of looking after herself
she has to go playing pranks on people outside. It will be her own silly fault if she is ill
tomorrow.’
‘Does your head feel hot?’ Bao-yu asked Skybright.
Skybright coughed a few times.
‘It’s nothing,’ she said, ‘I’m not that delicate!’
Just then the chiming clock that hung on the partition in the outer room struck twice
and they heard the old woman on night duty cough a couple of times and call out:
‘Go to sleep, young ladies! There’ll be plenty of time for talking in the morning.’
Bao-yu gave a subdued chuckle.
‘Better not talk any more,’ he said. ‘We don’t want them talking about us.’
After that the three of them settled down and went to sleep again.
When Skybright got up next morning, her nose was stuffed up’ her voice was hoarse,
and the slightest movement cost her an effort.
‘We’d better keep this dark,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If my mother gets to hear of it, she’s sure
to insist on your going back home until you’re better; and however nice it may be at
your home, I’m sure it won’t be so warm as here, so you’ll be better off with us. I’ll
get a doctor in through the back gate to have a look at you on the quiet.’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Skybright, ‘but at least let Mrs Zhu know what you’re
doing. Otherwise, when the doctor comes, what are you going to say if they start
asking ques?tions?’
Bao-yu knew that she was right and instructed one of the old nannies to go to Li Wan
with a message.
‘Tell Mrs Zhu that Skybright has got a bit of a chill. Say it’s nothing very serious, and
with Aroma away we shall be even more short-handed if she goes back home to get
better, so ?we’d like to get a doctor in quietly through the back gate to have a look at
her and not tell Her Ladyship about it.’
The old nannie was gone for quite a long time. When she did return it was with the
following answer.
‘Mrs Zhu says all right, as long as she’s better after one or two doses of medicine,
otherwise she thinks it would really be better to send her home. She says there’s so
much danger of infection at this time of year. She’s particularly worried that one of
the young ladies might catch something.’
All this time Skybright had been lying in the closet-bed inside, coughing. She stopped
coughing when she heard this message and called out angrily.
‘Anyone would think I’d got the plague I suppose I’d better go, if she’s so scared
that I might infect somebody. It would be just too terrible if any of you lot were to get
a head?ache or a sore throat as long as you live!’
She actually began getting up as she said this, but Bao-yu rushed in and made her lie
down again.
‘Now don’t start getting angry. She is, after ail, responsible for the girls and she’s
probably terrified that Lady Wang might get to know about this and grumble at her.
I’m sure that’s the only reason she says this: to cover herself in case it’s found out.
You’re inclined to be quick-tempered at the best of times. Now, with so much extra
heat inside you, you are even more inflammable!’
At this point the doctor was announced and Bao-yu barely had time to conceal
himself behind a bookcase as he entered the outer doorway, conducted by two or
three old women from the gate. The maids had all fled as soon as the arrival of a
male visitor was announced, leaving only three or four old nannies in charge of the
apartment. The old nannies quickly let down the closet-bed’s red embroidered
curtains and Sky?bright stretched forth her hand through a join in them.
This hand held out for the doctor’s inspection had nails two or three inches long on
two of its fingers, stained with balsam juice to a delicate shade of pink. The doctor
averted his eyes from this inflaming sight and would not proceed with the
examination until one of the old nannies had covered it up with a handkerchief.
When he had finished feeling the pulses, he got up, went into the outer room, and
announced his diagnosis to the nannies.
‘The young lady is suffering from inner congestion caused by exposure. In view of
the severe weather we have been having we should probably not be far wrong in
calling it a minor case of cold-fever or grippe. Fortunately your patient is a young lady
and therefore probably fairly modest in her diet; and the exposure does not appear
to have been a very serious one. What we have, then, is no more than a mild
infection picked up by someone whose stamina is normally rather low. One or two
doses of something to disperse the congestion should be sufficient to put her right.’
Having pronounced this diagnosis, he went off, conducted once more by the women
who had brought him in.
Li Wan had sent warning of the doctor’s arrival both to the servants on the gate and
the maids in the various apartments, so that his passage through the Garden, both
coming and going, was through an empty landscape in which not a single female was
to be seen. After passing through the Garden gate, he sat down in the outer lodge
which the pages occupied and wrote -out his prescription.
‘Don’t go yet, sir,’ said one of the old women when he had finished writing it. ‘Our
young master always likes to have his say about these matters. Like as not he’ll have
some question to ask you.’
The doctor looked startled.
‘Did you say “master”? But surely that was a young lady I examined just now? The
room was certainly a young lady’s boudoir, and the consultation was made with the
patient behind a curtain. Surely it cannot have been a young gentleman?’
The old woman laughed.
‘I see now why the boys said we had a “new doctor” coming in today. You certainly
don’t know much about this family, sir! That was our young master’s room you were
in lust now, but the person you examined was one of his maids one of the senior
ones. That was no young lady’s room. If one of the young mistresses had been ill, you
wouldn’t have got into her room that easy not on your first visit!’
She took the prescription from him and went back inside to show Bao-yu. Bao-yu
glanced through it rapidly. ‘Perilla’, ‘kikio root’, ‘wind-shield’ and ‘nepeta-seed’
appeared among the drugs at the head of the list, and lower down he noticed ‘thorny
lime’ and ‘ephedra’. He was appalled.
‘He’s prescribing for her as if she were a man. However bad the congestion is, you
can’t expect a young girl to stand up to drugs like thorny lime and ephedra. Who sent
for this man, anyway? You’d better get rid of him straight away and send for
someone we know.’
‘We weren’t to know what his prescriptions would be like,’ said the woman
defensively. ‘I suppose we could send one of the boys for Dr Wang. The only thing is,
as we didn’t tell the Office about this one, we shall have to pay him ourselves.’
‘How much ?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Well, you don’t want to give too little,’ said the old woman. ‘I should think for a
single visit a family like ours would give a tael.’
‘How much do we give Dr Wang for-a visit?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Ah, Dr Wang and Dr Zhang are our regular doctors. They aren’t paid by the visit.
They get a fixed yearly amount paid to them in quarterly installments. But this is a
new man who’s only ever been here the once, so we have to pay him now.’
Bao-yu ordered Musk to fetch a tael for him, but Musk said that she didn’t know
where Aroma kept her money.
‘I’ve seen her taking silver from the little pearl-inlaid cabinet,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’ll go
along with you and have a look.’
The two of them went into the room that Aroma used as her store-room and opened
the cabinet that Bao-yu had re?ferred to. In the top compartment they found nothing
but writing-brushes, ink-sticks, fans, incense-pastilles and a wide variety of scarves
and sachets. In the lower compartment, however, they found several strings of cash,
and there was a drawer in it in which they found a work-basket containing several
pieces of silver and even a little balance for weighing it with. Musk picked up the
balance.
‘Which of these is the one tad mark?’ she said.
‘That’s rich,’ said Bao-yu, ‘your asking me! Anyone would think you were new here.’
Musk laughed. She was about to go outside and ask, but Bao-yu stopped her.
‘Just pick out one of the larger pieces and give her that. There’s no need to bother
about the exact amount. We aren’t shopkeepers.’
Putting the balance back into the basket, Musk picked up one of the pieces of silver
and felt the weight of it on her palm.
‘I should think this one is about a tael,’ she said. ‘Anyway, it’s better to give too
much than too little. A poor creature like that, used to scrimping and scraping himself,
would say that it was meanness if we gave him too little. He’d never believe it was
because we didn’t know how to use-a balance.’
The woman who had brought the prescription was standing in the doorway,
following all this with amusement.
‘That piece you’ve got in your hand is half of a five-tael ingot,’ she said. ‘It must
weigh two taels at the very least. Since you haven’t got any silver-shears, I should
keep that piece if I were you and pick out a smaller one.’
But Musk had already closed the cabinet.
‘Oh, I can’t be bothered to look in there again. Just take it. Never mind the weight.’
‘And tell Tealeaf to go and get Dr Wang,’ said Bao-yu.
The old woman took the silver and went off to deal with the matter.
Tealeaf must have been quick, for Dr Wang arrived quite soon afterwards. The
diagnosis he gave after taking Skybright’s pulses was similar to the other man’s, but
there was no ephedra or thorny lime in his prescription: their place was taken by
milder drugs such as angelica, bitter-peel and white peony root; and the quantities
prescribed were smaller. Bao-yu was pleased.
‘That’s more like it!’ he said. ‘She certainly needs treating for congestion, but not in
the savage way this other man was proposing. I remember last year when I was
suffering from the same thing and Dr Wang came to look at me—in my case I was
badly constipated as well—he said that my constitution wouldn’t stand- up to harsh
decongestants like ephedra, gypsum and thorny lime. Well, if my constitution won’t
stand up to those drugs, I’m quite sure that yours or Skybright’s wouldn’t. In
comparison with you girls, I’m like one of those old aspens that have stood for half a
century or more in some grave-garth in the countryside, while you are like those
deli?cate crab-flowers that Yun brought round for me in the autumn.’
‘Aspens aren’t the only trees you find growing in grave?garths,’ said Musk, smiling.
‘What about pines and cypresses.? I hate aspens great, stupid trees I It’s not as if they
had more leaves than others, yet at the slightest breath of wind they start making a
racket. Why compare yourself to an aspen? How common!’
‘I wouldn’t compare myself with a pine or a cypress,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Confucius
himself speaks highly of those two trees:


“When the year is coldest, we see that pine and cypress are the last to fade.”
That shows you how noble they are. I should need to be a very conceited person to
compare myself with them.’

While he was still discussing this with Musk and Skybright, the old woman who had
shown him the prescription arrived back again with the drugs. Bao-yu told one of the
maids to find the silver medicine skillet and brew them on the brazier in his room.
‘Now do be sensible!’ said Skybright. Tell them to do it in the tea-kitchen. You’ll
stink the place out with the smell of boiling herbs if you do it in here.’
‘But the smell of boiling herbs is the finest smell in the world,’ said Bao-yu, ‘—far
superior to the perfume of any flower. Even the Immortals are supposed to gather
herbs and cook them; and gathering herbs to make medicine with is the favourite
occupation of hermits and holy men. The smell of medicine: that is the one aesthetic
treat that has so far been missing from this apartment; and now, today, we shall
enjoy it!’
And he insisted that they should prepare the medicine on the spot. Then he told
Musk to get some things ready to send to Aroma and commissioned one of the old
women to take them to her. She was to see how Aroma was and urge her not to
endanger her health by excessive weeping. When all these matters had been
attended to, he went off to pay his morning calls on Lady Wang and Grandmother Jia
and to have his lunch.
He found Xi-feng at Grandmother Jia’s place discussing mealtime arrangements with
his mother and grandmother.
‘Now that it’s so cold and the days are so short,’ she was saying, ‘wouldn’t it be
better if Li Wan and the young people were to have their meals in the Garden, to
avoid all this trek?king to and fro? They can begin coming in for them again when the
weather is warmer and the days are not so short.’
‘Oh, much better, surely?’ said-Lady Wang. ‘Especially when it’s snowing or blowing,
as it has been recently. It’s so bad for one to be exposed to the cold immediately
after eating. It’s also not good to eat food after being out in the cold with an empty
stomach. The empty parts fill up with cold air and then the food presses it down
inside one. That big five-frame room inside the back gate of the Garden would make
an ideal kitchen. We’ve already got all those women there who keep watch in the
Garden at night, so there are plenty of hands for fetching and carrying. All we need
are a couple of women from the kitchens here to go over and do the cooking. There
are regular allowances for vegetables and so forth, so they can either get the money
from Accounts and do their own shopping themselves, or, if they prefer, they can ask
the Office to get the stuff for them. And when we have anything special here, like
pheasant or roebuck, we can always arrange for a share of it to be sent over to them.’
‘I’d been thinking along these lines myself,’ said Grand?mother Jia, ‘but I was afraid
that opening another kitchen might mean extra trouble for you and Feng.’
‘ No trouble at all,’ said Xi-feng. ‘It’s simply a matter of switching
allowances—spending a bit more here and a bit more there. And even if it does put
our expenses up a bit, we don’t want the girls getting colds. Cousin Lin is particularly
sus?ceptible. Even Bao-yu is liable to suffer from the cold; and none of our girls is
really strong.’
How Grandmother Jia replied will be shown in the follow?ing chapter.

CHAPTER 52

Kind Patience conceals the theft of a Shrimp Whisker bracelet
And brave Skybright repairs the hole in a
Peacock Gold snowcape



‘QUITE so,’ said Grandmother Jia in answer to Xi-feng’s advocacy of the separate
kitchen. ‘I would have mentioned it myself, but you have so many burdens already
and I didn’t want to add to them. I know, of course, that you wouldn’t have
complained, but you might easily have got the impression that I only care about the
younger ones and have no con?sideration for you busy people who are responsible
for run-ring the household. However, now that you have suggested it yourself, I am
naturally delighted.’
It chanced that besides Aunt Xue and Mrs Li, Lady Xing and You-shi were also present
on this occasion, having come over some time previously to make their morning calls
and not yet gone back again. Grandmother Jia availed herself of their presence to
sing Xi-feng’s praises.
‘I wouldn’t say this as a rule because I don’t want to make her conceited, and in any
case the younger ones might not agree with me: but tell me now—as older married
women you have all had a good deal to do with her - have you ever met anyone quite
as thoughtful as Feng?’
Aunt Xue, Mrs Li and You-shi agreed that people with Xi-feng’s virtues were indeed
extremely rare.
‘Other young married women put on a show of liking their husband’s relations for
form’s sake,’ they observed, ‘but she really does seem to care for the young people;
and she is plainly devoted to you.’
Grandmother Jia nodded and sighed.
‘I’m very fond of her, but I’m afraid she’s a bit too sharp. It doesn’t do to be too
sharp.’
Xi-feng laughed.
‘Now there you are quite wrong, Grannie. The saying is that sharp-witted people
don’t live long. Everyone says that and everyone believes it, but you should be the
last person to agree with them. Look how long-lived and lucky you are, and yet you
are ten times more sharp-witted than me. By rights I should live twice as long as you,
if there is any truth in the saying. I expect to live until I am at least a thousand. At all
events I shan’t die until I have seen you go to heaven!’
‘It will be a very dull sort of world when all the rest are dead and only we two old
harpies are left alive,’ said Grandmother Jia.
The others laughed.
Remembering Skybright, Bao-yu left before the others and hurried back to his
apartment to see how she was. The air in it reeked of medicine. Skybright, lying on
the kang, her face a dusky red now with the fever, appeared to be completely on her
own. He felt her forehead and found it burning to the touch. Quickly warming his
hands over the stove, he slipped one of them inside the bedclothes and felt her body.
That too was fiery hot.
‘I should have thought Musk and Ripple might have stayed with you, if no one else,’
he said disgustedly. ‘I call that pretty heartless, leaving you on your own like this.’
‘Ripple’s not here because I made her go and have her lunch,’ said Skybright ‘And
Musk has only just this moment been called outside by Patience. They’re whispering
together in the front about something or other probably about the fact that I didn’t
go home to get better.’
‘Patience isn’t that sort of person,’ said Bao-yu. ‘She wouldn’t have known that you
were ill in any case, so she wouldn’t have come specially about you. Probably she
came to talk to Musk about something else, but happening to find you ill, pretended
she had come about you out of politeness. It’s the sort of social fib that anyone might
tell under the circum?stances. Even if you were in trouble for not going home, it’s got
nothing to do with Patience; and as you have always been on good terms with her in
the past, there’s no earthly reason why she should want to make unpleasantness
between you now by interfering in something that doesn’t concern her.’
‘I expect you’re right,’ said Skybright. ‘But I don’t under-stand why she should want
to hide things from me.’
‘I’ll go and find out what they’re talking about,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If I go out the back
door and round the side, I shall be able to listen to them from outside the window.’
Going round to the front as he had said, he inclined his ear to the window and
listened. He could hear Musk talking in a low voice to Patience inside:
‘How did you come to get it back again?’
‘It was when I was washing my hands in the Garden that day that I lost it,’ he heard
Patience reply. ‘Mrs Lian made me keep quiet about it at the time, but as soon as we
got back she sent word round to the nannies in the different apartments and told
them to investigate. To tell the truth, we rather suspected Miss Xing’s maid. We
thought being so poor and not used to seeing things like that lying around she might
have been tempted. We never dreamed that it would turn out to be one of your
people.
‘It was Trinket who stole it. She was seen by your Mamma Song. Fortunately, when
Mamma Song came round with the bracelet to tell Mrs Lian, Mrs Lian was out, so I
quickly took it from her and told her to keep quiet about it.
‘I couldn’t help thinking how considerate is to you girls and how proud of you all he
is. It’s only two years since that girl Honesty stole the jade and there are some I could
mention who are still gloating about it, and now here’s this girl stealing gold—not
from him this time but from one of his neighbours, which is worse. I could just
imagine the gloating there would be if that got around. It seemed so unjust that he,
of all people, should be let down by his own girls in this way.
‘Anyway, I told Mamma Song that she was under no cir?cumstances to let Bao-yu
know about this. “In fact,” I said, “you’d better not tell anyone. Just behave as if
nothing had happened.” Of course, it wasn’t only Bao-yu I was thinking about. I knew
that Their Ladyships would be very angry if the got to hear of it and then it would be
very unpleasant for Aroma and the rest of you.
‘The story I told Mrs Lian when she got back was that I’d been to see Mrs Zhu and
picked the bracelet up on the way. I told her it must have slipped off into the grass
that day while I was washing and got buried under the snow, which explains why
nobody could find it. When the snow melted, there it was, shining in the sun for all to
see. I think she believed me.
‘The reason I’m telling you this is so that you should be on your guard about that
girl. Keep an eye on her and don’t send her on any errands. When Aroma gets back,
have a word with her about it and see if you can’t cook up some excuse for
dis?missing her.’
‘Little wretch!’ said Musk. ‘It isn’t as if she hasn’t seen things like that before. How
could she be so stupid?’
‘It wasn’t a particularly valuable bracelet,’ said Patience. ‘It’s one that Mrs Lian gave
me. It’s what they call a “shrimp whisker” bracelet. I think the pearl on it might be
quite valuable. That Skybright of yours is such a fire-brand that if I told her this, I’m
sure she’d never be able to keep quiet about it. She’d blow up immediately and start
hitting the girl or shouting at her, and then the whole thing would be out, in spite of
all I had done to keep it dark. That’s why I’m telling you. I thought someone ought to
be warned, so that you can keep an eye on her.’
With these words Patience took her leave.
Bao-yu had listened to what she said with conflicting emotions: pleasure at
discovering that Patience understood him so well; anger that Trinket should be a
thief; regret that so intelligent a person should be capable of so ugly an action. Going
back to Skybright, he relayed to her everything he had just heard except what
Patience had said about Skybright herself, which he emended somewhat for her
benefit.
‘She said you’re such a worrier that if you were to hear this now, while you are ill, it
would make you worse. She’s planning to tell you about it when you are better.’
Skybright’s reaction was as fiery as Patience had foreseen it would be. Her eyebrows
flew up and her eyes became round with anger. She wanted to summon Trinket
immediately.
‘Isn’t it rather a poor return for Patience’s considerateness immediately to start
making an outcry about it?’ said Bao-yu, restraining her. ‘Why not accept what she
has done in the spirit in which it was intended and get rid of Trinket later on?’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Skybright, ‘but I feel so angry. If I don’t get it off my chest
now, I shall burst,’
‘What have you got to be angry about?’ said Bao-yu, amused. ‘You just concentrate
on getting better.’
Skybright had already had one dose of her medicine. To?wards evening she was given
the second infusion. But although she perspired a bit during the night, it didn’t really
seem to do much good. She still had a temperature, her head still ached, her nose
was still blocked, and she was still just as hoarse. In the morning Dr Wang came again,
and after taking her pulses, made a few alterations in the prescription; but although
the revised dosage brought down her temperature a little, her head still ached as
before.
‘Fetch the snuff,’ Bao-yu commanded. ‘If sniffing it can make her give a few good
sneezes, it will clear her head.’
Musk went off to do his bidding and presently returned with a little oval box made of
aventurine, edged and embel?lished with gold. Bao-yu took it from her and opened it.
Inside the lid, in West Ocean enamel, was a picture of a naked, yellow-haired girl with
wings of flesh. The box contained snuff of the very highest quality, which foreigners
call uncia,
‘Sniff some,’ he told Skybright, who had taken the box and was gazing fascinatedly
at the picture inside it. ‘If you leave it open too long, it will lose its fragrance and then
it won’t be so good.’
Skybright took a little of the snuff with her fingernail and sniffed it up her nose;
Nothing happened, so she scooped up a really large amount and sniffed again. A
tingling sensation passed through the root of her nose, right up inside her cranium
and she began to sneeze: four, five, six times in suc?cession. Immediately her eyes
and nose began to stream. She shut the box hurriedly with a laugh.
‘Goodness, how it burns! Give me some paper.’
At once one of the younger maids handed her a wad of tissue. Skybright used sheet
after sheet of it to blow her nose on.
 ‘How’s that?’ said Bao-yu.
‘Much clearer,’ she said. ‘But I still have this headache in the front of my head.’
‘Now that we’ve started using foreign medicine, we may as well go the whole bog,’
said Bao-yu. ‘I expect we’ll have you better again in no time. Musk, go to Mrs Lian’s
and tell her I said please could she let me have some of that Western stuff she uses
to make her headache plasters with. It’s called yi-fu-na’
Musk went off, returning after a goodish while with half a tablet. She hunted out a
scrap of red satin and cut out two little circles each about the size of a fingertips from
it; then, having melted the yi-fu-na to an ointment-like consistency over the stove,
she spread a little of it on each of them with a hair?pin. Skybright stuck them on
herself, one over each temple, with the aid of a hand-mirror. Musk laughed.
‘You already looked like a banshee to start with, with your ill face and your hair all
over the place. Now, with those two things on you, you really do look a sight! Funny:
one hardly notices them on Mrs Lian. I suppose it’s because she wears them so often.
—By the way;’ she said, turning to Bao-yu, ‘Mrs Lian asked me to tell you that
tomorrow is your Uncle Wang’s birthday and Her Ladyship wants you to go. Tell me
what clothes you’ll be wearing tomorrow so that I can get them ready now and not
have to rush around in the morning.’
‘Oh, anything,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Whatever comes first to hand. Birthdays! It’s nothing
but birthdays from one year’s end to the next.’
He got up and left the room, intending to go to Xi-chun’s place to see how she was
getting on with the ‘painting; but as he came out of the courtyard gate, he saw
Bao-qin little maid Periwinkle hurrying across the pathway ahead of him and hurried
forward to catch up with her.
‘Where are you going?’ he asked.
‘To Miss Lin’s,’ said Periwinkle. ‘Miss Xue and Miss Bao-?qin are there already and
I’m on my way to join them.’
Bao-yu changed his mind about going to see Xi-chun and accompanied Periwinkle to
the Naiad’s House. He found not only Bao-chai and Bao-qin there but Xing Xiu-yan as
well. Dai-yu and her three visitors were sitting on the clothes-warmer gossiping,
while Nightingale sat in the closet-bed alcove by the window, sewing. The girls
laughed when they saw him enter.
‘Another one? There’s nowhere for you to sit.’
‘What a charming picture!’ said Bao-yu. “‘A Bevy of Beauties Keeping Warm in
Winter.” I should have come earlier. Still, your room is so warm, I shall be perfectly all
right on this chair.’
He sat on the chair that Dai-yu normally occupied. On this occasion it was covered
with a squirrel-skin rug. A marble jardinière in the closet-bed alcove where
Nightingale was sit ring caught his eye. It was full of single-petalled ‘water nymph’
narcissi growing in clumps of four or five flowers from each bulb.
‘What beautiful flowers!’ he said. ‘The warmth of the room makes their scent even
richer. How is it I didn’t notice them yesterday?’
‘They were given to Qin by your Chief Steward Lai Da’s wife,’ said Dai-yu: ‘two pots
of narcissi and two of winter-sweet. Qin gave these ones to me and one of the two
pots of winter-sweet to Cousin Yun. I didn’t really want them, but as she was kind
enough to offer them to me, I thought it would be churlish not to accept. If you’d like
them, I’d be very happy to pass them on to you.’
‘Thank you,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but I’ve got two pots of them already. Though mind you,
they are not as good as these. In any case, if Cousin Qin gave them to you, you can’t
possibly go handing them over to somebody else.’
‘There’s hardly a minute of the day when I haven’t got a medicine-skillet on the
stove,’ said Dai-yu. ‘I seem practically to live on medicine nowadays. The smell of
medicine is bad enough as it is, but this heavy flower-scent on top of it makes me feel
quite faint. Besides, the smell of medicine spoils the smell of the flowers, which is a
pity. Much better carry them off somewhere where they can regain their purity away
from competing odours.’
‘I’ve got a sick person in my room today,’ said Bao-yu. ‘My room is full of
medicine-smells too. How did you know?’
‘What an extraordinary question!’ said Dai-yu. ‘I know nothing about it. How
should I know what goes on in your room? I don’t think you’ve teen attending to a
word I’ve been saying. You’re like someone who comes k half-way through a story
and disturbs the rest of the audience by asking questions.’
‘At least we shan’t want for a theme at our next poetry meeting,’ said Bao-yu.
“‘Narcissus “and “winter-sweet” will make splendid subjects.’
‘Oh no!’ wailed Dai-yu, burying her face in her hands. ‘What’s the point of having
poetry meetings? Another meet?ing only means another lot of penalties. It’s so
shaming.’
‘I suppose that’s meant for me,’ said Bao-yu, ‘since I’m the one who’s always
getting penalized. But if it doesn’t bother me, I don’t see what you have got to go
burying your face in your hands about.’
‘I shall call the next meeting,’ said Bao-chai brightly. ‘There will be four themes for
poems in Regular Verse and four for poems in other metres and everyone will have
to do all eight of them. The first will be a three-hundred-line poem in pentasyllabics
exhausting the rhyme “first”. It’s subject will be “On the Diagram of the Supreme
Ultimate”?
Bao-qin laughed.
One can see that it isn’t really poetry you’re interested in but in making things
difficult for others. It could be done, of course, if one really wanted to do it—it would
simply be a question of selecting bits from the Book of Changes and tortur?ing them
into some sort of verse—but what would be the point?
‘When I was eight I went with my father on one of his trips to buy foreign
merchandise to one of the Western sea-ports and while we were there we saw a girl
from the country of Ebenash. She was just like the foreign girls you see in paint?ings:
long, yellow hair done into plaits, and her head was smothered in jewels: carnelians,
cat’s-eyes and emeralds. She was wearing a corslet of golden chain-mall and a dress
of West Ocean brocade and she had a Japanese sword at her side covered all over
with jewels and gold. Actually she was more beautiful than the foreign girls you see
in paintings. They said that she had a perfect understanding of our literature and
could expound the Five Classics and write poems in Chinese. My father asked her
through an interpreter if she would write something for us in Chinese characters and
she wrote out one of her own poems for him.’
The cousins were enthralled and Bao-yu eagerly begged her to show them the poem.
‘That’s not possible,’ said Bao-qin. ‘I left it behind in Nanking.’
Bao-yu was very disappointed.
‘Just my luck!’ he said. ‘And I was hoping to broaden my experience.’
‘Don’t be a tease!’ said Dai-yu, giving Bao-qin a tug. ‘You didn’t leave anything
behind in Nanking. Look at all the lug?gage you brought with you! I think you’re
making it up. The others can believe you if they like, but I don’t.’
Bao-qin blushed and hung her head. She made no reply, but a little, secret smile was
faintly discernible in her features.
‘How like you to say that, Frowner!’ said Bao-chai. ‘You really are too sharp.’
‘Well, if she’s brought it with her, she ought to let us have a look and satisfy our
curiosity,’ said Dai-yu.
‘She’s got such a great pile of stuff,’ said Bao-chai, ‘she simply hasn’t had time to go
through it all yet. How does she know which of all those trunks and boxes she put it
in? Wait until she’s had time to sort her things out: no doubt she will come across the
poem and let you see it then.’ She turned to Bao-qin. ‘Or perhaps you can remember
it? If so, why don’t you recite it for us now?’
‘It was in Regular Pentameter,’ said Bao-qin. ‘I can re?member that. For a foreigner
it was really quite a good poem.’
‘Hold on.!’ said Bao-chai. ‘If you are going to recite it, let me first send for Yun, so
that she can hear it as well.’
She gave instructions to Periwinkle.
‘Go back to my room and tell Miss Shi that we’ve got a beautiful foreigner here
who can write poems in Chinese. Tell her that as she’s so crazy about poetry, we
thought she’d like to meet her. And tell her to bring that other poetry maniac with
her when she comes.’
Periwinkle went off laughing to deliver the message. Presently Xiang-yan’s voice,
loudly inquiring ‘Where’s this beautiful foreigner?’ could be heard outside, and a
moment later she and Caltrop walked into the room.
                 ‘Ere yet the shape was seen, the voice was heard’
said the others, laughing. When xiang-yun and Caltrop were seated, Bao-qin
repeated for their benefit what. she had just been telling the others. xiang-yun
pressed her to recite the poem, and this she now proceeded to do:

The Land of Ebenash
         Last night I dreamt I dwelt in marble halls;
         Tonight beside the watery waste I sing.
         The island’s cloud-cap drifts above the sea,
         And mists about its mountain forests cling.
         Our pasts and presents to the moon are one;
         Our lives and loves beyond our reckoning.
         Yet still my heart yearns for that distant South,
         Where time is lost in one eternal spring.


‘Fancy a foreigner being able to write that!’ said the cousins admiringly. ‘It’s better
than we Chinese could do ourselves.’
While they were still enthusing over the poem, Musk arrived to report that someone
had just been round with a message for Master Bao from Lady Wang.
‘Her Ladyship says, when you go to your Uncle Wang’s first thing tomorrow, will
you tell them that she’s sorry she can’t go herself, but she’s not feeling very well?’
Bao-yu stood up, out of respect for his mother, to reply. He asked Bao-chai and
Bao-qin lf they would be going too. No, said Bao-chai, they had sent a present
yesterday, and that was all they would be doing.
Conversation continued a little longer and then the com?pany broke up. As Bao-yu
politely insisted on the others going out before him, he would have been the last to
leave, but just as he was about to do so, Dai-yu called him back.
Tell me,’ she said, just how long will Aroma be away?’
‘I don’t know;’ said Bao-yu, ‘but she certainly won’t come back until after the
funeral?
Dai-yu evidently had something on her mind that she wanted to say but was finding
difficulty in expressing. whatever it was, she must have abandoned it, for, after
reflecting for a few moments ins in silence, all she said was:
You’d better go.’
Bao-yu, too, had a feeling that there were a lot of things he ought to be asking her,
but he could not for the moment recollect what any of them were. After trying
unsuccessfully to remember, he left her with a cheerful ‘See you tomorrow’ and
went down the steps outside, his head bent low as he con?tinued ruminating. Just as
he was about to set out across the forecourt, something occurred to him and he
remounted the steps and went in again.
‘The nights are getting so much longer now. How many times do you cough in the
night? Do you wake up very often?’
‘I’m much better at night than I was,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Last night I only coughed twice.
But I still don’t sleep very well. Last night I only slept between about two and four in
the morning. After that I couldn’t get hack to sleep again.’
‘Ah, I knew there was something important I wanted to ask you about,’ said Bao-yu.
‘I’ve just remembered what it was.’ He drew closer to her ear and went on in a lower
voice. ‘You know that bird’s nest that Cousin Bao sent you,—’
But before he could finish, Aunt Zhao called in to inquire lf Dai-yu was feeling better.
Dai-yu knew that she had dropped in on her way back from seeing Tan-chun, and
that the kind?ness, if kindness it were, was of a-somewhat tangential nature;
nevertheless she begged her with eager politeness to be seated and thanked her
warmly for the visit.
‘How kind of you to think of me, Mrs Zhao and to come here yourself in such bitter
weather!’
She ordered tea to be poured for her visitor) simultaneously darting a look at Bao-yu
which he rightly interpreted as an order to make himself scarce. It was in any case
time for his dinner, so he went to his mother’s place to have it. She made him go
back early, bearing in mind that he must be up betimes next morning.
When he got back to his own room, Bao-yu found that Skybright had already taken
her medicine. He judged it best to let her stay where she was in the closet-bed. He
himself slept on the space outside the curtain which Musk had occu?pied the
previous night. This time Musk slept on the clothes-warmer. He had it moved up
beside the closet-bed before they went to bed, so that she could be near at hand
during the night.
The night passed by without event.

*

Next day, before it was yet light, Skybright was calling on Musk to wake up.
‘Come on, Musk! You ought to be awake by now, Haven’t you slept enough yet?
You go outside and tell the others to get his morning drink ready while I try waking
him up.’
Musk hurriedly drew on a garment and got out of bed.
‘We’d better-both wake him and wait till he’s dressed and the clothes-warmer has
been carried back to its usual place before we let the others it’,’ she said. ‘The old
women have already said that he’s not to sleep in the same room as you in case he
catches your sickness. We shall never hear the end of it, if they find out that we’ve
been sleeping all crowded up together like this.’
‘Yes,’ said Skybright. ‘I was thinking that too.’
The two girls began calling Bao-yu. He must in fact have been awake already, for he
got out of bed and began dressing immediately. Musk called in one of the junior
maids to help her move the warmer back into place and fold up the bedding. Only
when all traces of the previous night’s sleeping arrange?ments had been effaced
were Ripple and Emerald called in to assist Bao-yu with his toilet.
  ‘It’s very overcast again,’ said Musk, when Bao-yu’s toilet had been completed. ‘It
looks as lf it will snow. You’d better put on your felt.’
Bao-yu nodded and changed the outer garment he had put on for a more substantial
one. A junior maid came in carrying a little tea-tray on which was a covered cup
containing a con?coction of red dates and Fukien lotus-seeds. Bao-yu drank a few
mouthfuls, took a piece of ginger from a saucerful of crystallized shapes held out to
him by Musk and put it in his mouth to nibble, addressed a few brief admonitions to
Sky?bright to look after herself while he was away, and went off to see his
grandmother.
She had not yet risen when he arrived at her apartment, but the servants, knowing
that he was going visiting and could not wait for her to get up, admitted him at once
to her bed?room. He caught a glimpse of Bao-qin lying asleep behind her, her face
turned inwards to the wall. The old lady observed that her grandson was wearing,
over his formal dress of lychee-brown broadcloth, a dark-red felt cape embellished
with roundels of gold thread and coloured silk embroidery. Its slate-blue satin border
was fringed with tassels.
‘Is it snowing?’ she asked him.
‘Not yet,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but it looks as if it will.’
Grandmother Jia turned to Faithful:
‘Give him that peacock-feather cloak we were looking at yesterday.’
Faithful murmured a reply and went out of the room, re?turning presently with a
magnificent snow-cape that gleamed and glittered with gold and green and
bronzy-bluish lights. It was like Bao-qin’s mallard-cape and yet somehow different.
‘This is what they call “peacock gold”,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It is made by the
Russians. They twist the barbs of peacock-feathers into a kind of yarn and weave it
from that. The other day I gave your cousin Bao-qin a cape like this made out of
mallard feathers. Now I am giving this one to you.’
Bao-yu kotowed and put it on. Grandmother Jia smiled.
‘Go and show your mother’
Bao-yu obediently hurried off to do so. On his way out he came upon Faithful,
standing beside the kang in the outer room. She affected to be rubbing her eyes in
order not to have to look at him. She had avoided speaking to him ever since the
frightful scene nearly two months earlier when she had vowed never to marry, and
Bao-yu was continually being made uncomfortable by her avoidance of him. Seeing
her once more preparing to ignore him, he went up to her with a friendly smile in the
hope of breaking her silence.
‘Faithful, see this! How do you think I look in it?’
But Faithful simply turned and fled, retreating into Grand?mother Jia’s bedroom.
Obliged to give up, he continued on his way to Lady Wang’s. After his mother had
seen the cape, he went into the Garden to show himself off to Musk and Sky?bright.
After that he returned to his grandmother’s to report.
‘I showed it to Mother. She said it seems almost a pity to wear it and I must be very,
very careful not to spoil it.’
‘That was the only one I had left,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘If you do spoil it I haven’t
got another one to give you. And there would be no question of getting another one
made for you - not in these parts.’
She put on her admonitions-for-the-departing-grandchild voice:
‘Now don’t drink too much. And leave early.’
‘Yes, Grandma.’
Old women from his grandmother’s apartment accom?panied him as far as the
reception hall of the outer mansion. Below the steps outside it his foster brother Li
Gui, together with Wang Rong, Zhang Ruo-jin, Zhao Yi-hua, Qian Sheng and Zhou Rui
and the pages Tealeaf, Storky, Ploughboy and Sweeper, had been waiting a long time
in readiness. The pages were carrying clothing-bundles and blankets, and two of the
older men were holding a splendidly caparisoned horse by the bridle. The old women
issued a few words of admonition to the men, the men, after acknowledging them
with a few per?functory cries, handed Bao-yu his whip and held the stirrup for him to
mount, and Bao-yu, mindful of the precious cape, got up slowly into the saddle. The
little party then began to advance, Li Gui and Wang Rong, one on either side, holding
the bridle-rings, Qian Sheng and Zhou Rul walking ahead, and Zhang Ruo-jin and
Zhao Yi-hua following closely behind.
‘Zhou, Qian,’ Bao-yu called out from the saddle to the two in front, ‘let’s go out of
the side gate, otherwise it will mean going past my father’s door and I shall have to
get down.’
‘Since Sir Zheng went away, his door’s kept locked all the time,’ said Zhou Rui,
turning a grinning face back to his young master. ‘You don’t need to get down.’
‘Even though it is locked, I still ought to get down,’ said Bao-yu.
‘Quite right, sir,’ said Li Gui and Qian Sheng approvingly. ‘If you was to get slack
about dismounting and Mr Lai or Mr .Lin was to see you, they’d be sure to have
something to say about it. Even though they couldn’t very well tell yon off, like
enough they’d blame us for not teaching you manners.’
By now Zhou Rui and Qian Sheng were moving towards the side entrance. While the
point of etiquette was still being discussed, they ran head on into Lai Da himself, of
whom they had just been speaking. Bao-yu at once reined to a halt and made as if to
dismount, but, Lai Da hurried up and prevented him by clinging to his leg. Bao-yu
thereupon stood up in the stirrups and, taking him by the hand, addressed him
graciously for some moments before continuing on his way. He had barely done so
when thirty or forty pages armed with dustpans and brushes came trooping into the
courtyard. Immediately they caught sight of Bao-yu, they lined up in a row along the
wall and stood with their arms at their sides while one of their number, evidently the
leader, stepped forward and, dropping to one knee in the Manchu salute, wished
Bao-yu a good morning. Bao-yu did not know the page’s name, so he merely smiled
and nodded. The whole troop remained motionless until the horse and its rider had
passed by.
Bao-yu’s little party now issued out of the side gate, where ten horses were ready
waiting for them: one for Li Gui and each of his fellows and one for each of the pages.
All sprang at once into the saddle and were off down the street like a puff of smoke.
At this point our story leaves them and turns to other matters.

*

Back at Green Delights Skybright, exasperated to find, after another dose of her
medicine, that the sickness still showed no disposition to depart, was holding forth
loudly against the whole generation of doctors.
They’re all cheats,’ she said. ‘They take your money, but none of the medicine they
give you is any good.’
‘Don’t be so impatient,’ said Musk soothingly. ‘Getting better is always a lengthy
business. You know what they say “Sickness comes like an avalanche but goes like
reeling silk”. This stuff isn’t the Elixir of Life. You can’t expect it to cure you in a
twinkling. You’ll be all right if you take things easy for a few days. Getting yourself
worked up will only give the sickness a tighter grip on you.’
Skybright’s anger changed direction and vented itself now upon the junior maids.
‘Where have you lot all sneaked off to?’ she called out to them. ‘Very bold, aren’t
you, now that you seem helpless? Just you wait till I’m better: I’ll have the hide off
every one of you.’
Her outcry produced a solitary response. A little girl called Steadfast came hurrying in
and inquired, ‘What is it, Miss?’
‘What’s happened to the others?’ said Skybright. ‘Are they all dead? Are you the
only one left alive?’
While she was speaking, Trinket, too, came in—at a some?what more ambling pace
than the other girl.
‘Look at this little creature, now!’ said Skybright. ‘Why couldn’t she have come
sooner? You’d have come running here fast enough if we’d been handing out
monthly allowances or sharing out sweets, wouldn’t you? Then you’d have been the
first to arrive. Come closer. I’m not a tiger. I won’t eat you.’
Trinket edged a few steps nearer. As she did so, Skybright suddenly raised herself
from her lying position, snatched hold of her hand, and began jabbing at it violently
with an enor?mous hairpin which she had been keeping concealed under her pillow.
‘What do you want this little claw for?’ she said. ‘It’s no good with a needle and
thread. All it’s good for is picking and stealing. Shifty eyes and light fingers! A little
claw like this can only bring you disgrace. Much better stab it!—and slab it!—and
stab it! so that it can’t do any more thieving.’
Trinket was by now screaming with pain. Musk quickly dragged her away out of
Skybright’s clutches and forced Skybright to lie down again in bed.
‘You’ve only just been sweating after the medicine,’ she said. ‘What’s the matter
with you? Do you want to die? If you’ll just wait until you’re better, you can punish
her as much as you like. Don’t start making a scene about it now!’
But Skybright insisted on calling in Mamma Song and deal?ing with the matter at
once.
‘Master Bao has told me to tell you that he finds Trinket lazy,’ she said when
Mamma Song arrived. ‘She answers him back and doesn’t do anything when he gives
her orders, and even when Aroma tells her to do things she says rude things about
her behind her back. Master Bao is most anxious that she should be dismissed
immediately. He says he will speak to Her Ladyship about it himself when he sees her
tomorrow.’
When Mamma Song heard this, she knew that the story of the bracelet must have
leaked out.
‘That’s as may be,’ she said. ‘But oughtn’t we to wait until Miss Aroma comes back
and tell her first?’
‘What I am giving you are Master Bao’s own orders,’ said Skybright. ‘He was most
particular that she Should be dis?missed immediately. I don’t see that Miss
Aroma—or Miss Sweetscents or Miss Smellypots for that matter—has got any?thing
to do with it. I know what I’m doing. Just do as I say. Go and get someone from her
family to come here immediately and take her away.’
‘You might just as well,’ said Musk. ‘She’ll have to go sooner or later. Let them take
her away now and get it over with.’
So Mamma Song had to go off and summon the girl’s mother from outside. When
Trinket had finished getting her belongings together, her mother went in with her to
see Musk and Skybright.
‘Now what’s all this about?’ she said. ‘If the girl’s done wrong, why can’t you just
punish her for it? Why do you have to dismiss her? It doesn’t leave us much face,
does it, if she’s dismissed ?’
‘You’ll have to ask Bao-yu about that when he gets back,’ said Skybright. ‘It’s
nothing to do with us.’ The woman sneered.
‘You know perfectly well that I wouldn’t dare. He always does what you young
ladies want him to in any case. Even if I saw him and he agreed that she could stay,
there’s no guaranteeing that she would if you young ladies weren’t agreeable. Take
what you said just now. I know he’s not here at the moment, but even so. if I was to
name his name as you did just now without a “master” or a “mister” to it, people
would say I was a savage, but for you young ladies, seemingly, it’s quite all right.’
Skybright became red with anger.
‘I called him by his name, did I? Why don’t you go and report me to Their Ladyships?
Tell them that I’m a savage and get me dismissed.’
‘I advise you to take that girl out of here and be on your way,’ said Musk. ‘If you
have anything to say, you can say it later. You can’t stand here wrangling about it now.
When have you ever seen other people bandying words with us? Even Mrs Lai and
Mrs Lin show a bit of restraint when they talk to us. And as for this business of saying
“Bao-yu” instead of “Master Bao”: everyone knows that it’s Her Old Ladyship’s
particular wish that we should. Because he’s not strong and she’s afraid he might die
young, she likes as many people as possible to use his name, to bring him luck. She
even has it written in big characters and pasted up on walls outside to get people
saying it. It would be funny if we couldn’t use his name when every water-carrier and
dung-carrier and beggar in town can do so. As a matter of fact only yesterday Mrs Lin
got told off by Her Old Ladyship for calling him “Master Bao”.
‘And for another thing, we senior maids are constantly having -to take messages to
Her Old Ladyship and Her Lady-ship about him, and when we do, we always say
“Bao-yu”, never “Master Bao”. Why, I should think we must each of us use his name a
couple of hundred times every day. You cer?tainly chose the wrong thing to find fault
with when you picked on that one! If you don’t believe me, go round one of these
days when you are free to Her Old Ladyship’s or Her Ladyship’s and you will hear us
openly calling him “Bao-yu” to their faces. But of course, you don’t have any
important business that would bring you in contact with Their Lady-ships, do you? All
your time is spent doing odd-jobs outside. One could hardly expect you to know the
way things are done in here.
‘But I’m afraid we really can’t have you standing around here any longer. If you stay
much longer, I’m afraid even though we don’t object someone else may come along
and ask what you are doing here. If you want to appeal against the girl’s dismissal,
you should get her out of here first and take it up with Mrs Lin afterwards and she
will speak to Master Bao about it. With all the hundreds of people there are in this
household we can’t have just anyone running in and out when?ever they feel like it.
We don’t even know the names of half of them.’
By way of emphasizing her point, Musk ordered one of the junior maids to fetch a
floor-cloth and begin wiping the floor. At this Trinket’s mother, unable to find a reply
and fearful of being caught staying too long, swept out angrily, taking her daughter
with her. But Mamma Song was not letting them get away so easily.
‘You certainly don’t have much idea of manners, my good woman. After all the time
she’s been here, your daughter could at least make the young ladies a kotow before
she goes. She may have no other parting gift to give them—I don’t suppose they’d
set much store by it if she had— but she might at least have the decency to make -
them a kotow. You can’t both just up and go.’
Trinket was obliged to come in again and kotow to the two inside. She also went
round to do the same for Ripple and Emerald, but they refused to look at her. After
that she de?parted with her mother, the latter indicating as they went, by many a
sniff and sigh, the hatred that she dared net express more openly.
A consequence of this latest exposure to the cold and of the accompanying
emotional upset was that Skybright was now feeling bad again. At lighting-up time,
after tossing about feverishly all day, she was just beginning to settle down at last
when Bao-yu returned in a great fret and began stamping and groaning almost as
soon as -he entered the room. Musk asked him what the matter was.
‘It’s this cloak that Grandmother gave me this morning. She was so pleased about it,
and now—I don’t know how it happened—I’ve gone and got a burn in it behind the
lapel. Fortunately it was fairly dark just now when I came back and neither
Grandmother nor Mother noticed anything.’
He took it off for Musk-to examine. It was only a little burn, about the size of a
finger-print, but clearly visible.
‘It must have been caused by a- spark from your hand-warmer,’ said Musk. ‘It’s
nothing to worry about. We’ll send someone out on the quiet with it immediately to
find a good invisible mender and get it mended for you.’
She wrapped it up and called in one of the old nannies to take it out for them.
‘Tell them it has to be ready by daylight tomorrow. And for heaven’s sake don’t let
Her Old Ladyship or Her Ladyship find out about it!’
The woman was gone a very long time. When she at last returned, she was still
carrying the bundle with the peacock cloak in it.
‘ I’ve tried everywhere—invisible menders, tailors, em?broiderers,
seamstresses—and none of them will touch it. They all say they don’t know what the
material is and don’t want to be responsible.’
‘Oh dear!’ said Musk. ‘What are we going to do now? Well, you lust can’t wear it
tomorrow, that’s all.’
‘But I must,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Tomorrow is his actual birthday. Grandmother and
Mother have both said I must. Today was only the first day of the celebrations, not
his actual birthday. Isn’t it just my luck to burn it the very first time I put it on?’
Skybright, who had listened to all this in silence, could con?tain herself no longer and
sat up immediately in bed.
‘Come on, let me have a look. If you weren’t meant to wear it, you won’t wear it.
No good making all this fuss about it now.’
‘There’s something in that,’ said Bao-yu laughing, and handed it to her. He brought
the lamp over so that she could examine it more closely.
‘This is made of “peacock gold”,’ said Skybright. ‘If we could get hold of some of the
thread .and make a little darn with it’ I think it would probably pass.’
‘We’ve got peacock gold thread,’ said Musk. ‘The trouble is that apart from you
there’s no one else here who could do the darning.’
‘I shall just have to make the effort and do it then, shan’t I?’ said Skybright.
‘No, that’s out of the question,’ said Bao-yu. ‘You’ve only just started getting better.
You’re not in a fit state to do sewing yet.’
‘Oh, don’t be such an old woman!’ said Skybright. ‘I know what I’m capable of.’
So saying, she sat up again in bed, knotted up her loosely flowing hair, and drew a
jacket on over her shoulders. Her body felt abnormally light and she was almost
overcome with dizziness. It really did seem as if the effort would be too much for her;
but knowing what a state Bao-yu would be in if the snow-cape was not repaired, she
gritted her teeth, and fighting back the weakness that threatened to engulf her, told
Musk to pinch the yarn and thread a needle for her while she herself took a length of
it and held it against the material.
‘It’s not really a very good match,’ she said, ‘but I don’t suppose it will show very
much when it’s been darned.’
‘I’m sure it will do very nicely,’ said Bao-yu. ‘At all events, we’re not going to be able
to find a Russian tailor to do it for us!’
Skybright began by opening up the seam of the lining underneath the burnt patch so
that she could insert a cup-sized darning mushroom from inside. Having stretched
the material out over the mushroom, she scraped away the charred parts and the
surrounding nap with a razor until the threads were clearly exposed, then, with her
needle and thread, she worked first across in one direction and then at right-angles in
the other until she had filled the hole with a criss-cross darn. Using this as a
foundation, she now began to weave the thread in and out with her needle so as to
Imitate the surrounding pattern. This was the most difficult and exhausting part of
the work. After each couple of stitches she had to stop and examine what she had
done, and after every four or five she had to lean back on the pillow and rest.
Meanwhile Bao-yu fussed around her unceasingly, one moment asking her if she
would like a ‘nice hot drink’, another moment suggesting that she should rest, one
moment fetching a squirrel-skin cloak to put over her shoulders, the next moment a
pillow for her back, until she became quite frantic and had to entreat him to leave
her alone
‘My dear little grandfather—please just go to bed! If you stay up any longer, you’ll
have rings under your eyes in the morning, and that will never dot’
Bao-yu could see that he was exasperating her and made a pretence of settling down
in his bed; but he could not get to sleep. After he had been lying awake for some
time, he heard the chiming clock strike four. Skybright had just completed the
mending and was finishing off the job by carefully teasing the nap out with a little
toothbrush.
‘That’s wonderful,’ said Musk. ‘If you didn’t look at it carefully, you could never tell
it was a darn.’
Bao-yu asked to see.
‘It’s perfect,’ he said. ‘It looks exactly the same as the rest.’
Skybright had been coughing a good deal during the final stages of her task and it
had been all she could do to conclude
it.
‘Anyway, it’s done,’ she said. ‘It doesn’t really look right, but I can’t do any
more—Aiyo!’
With a cry of weariness she sank back, utterly exhausted, upon the bed.
If you wish to know the outcome, please read the chapter which follows.

CHAPTER 53

Ning-guo House sacrifices to the ancestors on New Year’s Eve
And Rong-guo House entertains the whole family on
Fifteenth Night



SEEING that Skybright’s repair of the peacock gold snow cape had so utterly
exhausted her, Bao-yu called in a junior maid to help massage her and for a while
they pummelled her between them. After that they all went to bed; but in less than
no time it seemed to be broad daylight and they had to get up again. Instead of going
straight off to his uncle’s, however, Bao-yu first sent someone to summon Dr Wang.
‘The doctor arrived promptly and proceeded to take Skybright’s pulses. He appeared
to be disconcerted by what he found.
‘Yesterday she seemed to be a little better,’ he said, ‘but this pulse today takes us
right back to where we started from—empty, superficial, faint, constricted. Now why
should that be? She must have been eating or drinking too much. Either that, or she
has been worrying about something. The original attack was not a serious one; but
failure to take care of oneself after perspiration has been induced can be very
serious.’
He went outside and wrote another prescription, which was presently brought in to
Bao-yu. Bao-yu noticed that the sudorifics and decongestants of the earlier
prescription had been omitted and restorative drugs to increase the vitality and
nourish the blood, such as lycoperdon, nipplewort and angelica, had been
substituted. He gave instructions for the medicine to be made up immediately. He
seemed distressed.
‘This is dreadful. If anything should happen to you after this, I shall never forgive
myself.’
Skybright, lying back on her pillow, hooted derisively at his concern:
My dear young Master, just get on with your own affairs and don’t worry about me.
I’m not about to go into a decline, I assure you!’
Bao-yu was in any case obliged to go now; but having held out at his uncle’s place
until the afternoon, he managed to get back to her by pretending that he was feeling
unwell.
Skybright was certainly quite ill. Fortunately she was normally an active, lively sort of
girl, not given to moping and vapours; she had always been sensible—even
abstemious—in her diet; and her constitution was a sound one. The Jias were great
believers in the virtues of fasting. Masters and servants alike were put on a starvation
diet at the slightest hint of a cough or cold, the physic and nursing they received
being considered of only secondary importance to this, and Skybright had been
fasting now for two or three days, ever the influenza began. In addition to this, she
had taken her medicine regularly and, except for the one night’s lapse, had looked
after herself reasonably well. Although the over-exertion set her back a few days, she
was soon on the mend again. And as the new catering arrangements whereby the
cousins now ate in their own apartments made ordering things much easier, Bao-yu
was able to get all sorts of soups and broths made up to aid her recovery.
Omitting details of this convalescence, our story passes on to the return of Aroma,
which occurred shortly after her mother’s funeral. As soon as she got back, Musk told
her all about Trinket and how Skybright had dismissed her first and reported the
dismissal afterwards to Bao-yu. Aroma merely remarked that Skybright had been ‘too
hasty’, but made no further comment.
Li Wan had herself now fallen a victim to the season’s cold; Lady Xing was suffering
from an inflammation of the eyes which necessitated Ying-chun’s and Xiu-yan
attendance on her both mornings and evenings to dress them for her; Mrs Li had
been invited to spend some days with a younger brother and gone off taking Li Wen
and Li Qi with her; and Bao-yu was preoccupied with Aroma, who was still thinking
con?stantly of her mother and liable at any moment to break down, as well as with
Skybright, who had still not entirely recovered. So what with one thing and another,
no one felt much in the mood for writing poetry and one or two of the club’s
fixture-days went by without a meeting.
It was now well into the twelfth month and Lady Wang and Xi-feng were busily
preparing for the New Year. The season of appointments brought news that Wang
Zi-teng had been promoted to the post of Inspector-General of Armies in the Nine
Provinces and that Jia Yu-cun was to become Under Secretary to the President of the
Board of War with occasional duties at Court. Over in the Ning mansion Cousin Zhen
had opened up the Hall of the Ancestors and set his people to work sweeping it,
setting the vessels out in readiness for the New Year sacrifices, and welcoming the
spirits back into the an?cestral tablets. He also had the main hall of the Ning-guo
mansion swept in readiness for the annual ceremonial hanging of the ancestral
portraits. Everyone in both mansions, both high and low, was in a fever of activity.
One morning in the course of these preparations, as You-?shi, who had not long since
risen, was, with the assistance of Jia Rong’s new wife, getting the presents of newly
made clothes ready for sending to Grandmother Jia, a maid came in bearing a trayful
of New Year medallions.
‘It’s from Merry, ma’am. He says that loose silver you gave him the other day was of
several different marks but the total weight was one hundred and fifty-three taels
and thirteen pennyweights and he says they’ve managed to make two hundred and
twenty medallions from it.’
She held out the tray for You-shi to inspect. On it there were medallions shaped like
plum-flowers, crabflower-shaped medallions, medallions with ‘heart’s desire’ rebus
patterns of ingot, brush and sceptre, and others with patterns of aus?picious flowers.


‘Yes,’ said You-shi, ‘they seem to be all right. Tell him to take them inside
immediately.’
The maid went off to do her bidding. Shortly after that Cousin Zhen came in to have
his lunch and Jia Rong’s wife hurried out to avoid him.
‘Have we received the bounty money for the New Year sacrifices yet?’ Cousin Zhen
asked You-shi when they were alone together.
‘I sent Rong to draw it this morning,’ said You-shi.
‘It’s not that we rely on the money exactly,’ said Cousin Zhen, ‘but it is after all the
gift of the Emperor and I think we ought to draw it as soon as possible and get it
across to Lady Jia so that it can be used to pay for the offerings. It’s a double blessing
when the gracious favour shown us by His Majesty can be passed on to the ancestors.
However many thousands of our own we were to spend on them, it wouldn’t do
them nearly as much honour as these offerings subsidized by the imperial
bounty—not to mention the advantages that we enjoy as recipients of Imperial
favour. And we have to remember that apart from the one or two great families like
ours who don’t really need this money, there are many, many families of poor
hereditary officials who do actually depend on it for their ancestral sacrifices and
who wouldn’t be able to celebrate New Year properly without it. So you see it really
was extra?ordinarily benevolent and far-seeing of the dynasty to institute this annual
bounty.’
‘Yes, indeed,’ said You-shi.
‘Master Rong is back,’ a servant came in to report while the two of them were still
talking.
‘Tell him to come in,’ said Cousin Zhen
Jia Rong entered carrying a little yellow bag, not as one would normally carry a bag,
but holding it in both hands at shoulder height.
‘You’ve been a long time, haven’t you?’ said Cousin Zhen.
Jia Rong smiled nervously.
‘This year they’re not paying it at the Board of Rites any longer but at the treasury
of the Imperial Victuallers; so having first gone to the Board of Rites, I had to go from
there all the way to the Imperial Victuallers to draw the money. The people at the
Imperial Victuallers’ office all asked after you, by the way. They say they haven’t seen
you for a long time, but they often think about you.’
‘It’s not me they think about but my things,’ said Cousin Zhen with a dry smile.
‘Either that, or they are hoping for an invitation to come round over the New Year.’
He was inspecting the yellow bag as he said this. It had a sealing-slip with the words

PERPETUAL BOUNTY

written on it in large characters. On the other side was the chop of the Department
of Sacrifices of the Board of Rites and some columns of smaller characters:

             Annual grant awarded in perpetuity to Jia Yan, Duke
             of Ning-guo, and Jia Yuan, Duke of Rong-guo, for
             New Year Sacrifices: goods to the value of—taels net
             Cash received by: Jia Rong, Captain, Imperial Body-
?            guard, Inner Palace, on (date)
             Issuing officer for the year: (name)

This was followed by a cipher in red ink.
After inspecting the yellow bag, Cousin Zhen had his lunch; then, when he had
washed his hands and rinsed his mouth out, he changed into formal hat and boots
and, ordering Jia Rong to follow him with the bag, set off for the other mansion to
report the arrival of the bounty-money, first to Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang and
then to Jia She and Lady Xing next door. When they got back he took out the money
and ordered the bag to be carried into the Hall of the Ancestors and burnt there in
the great incense-burner in front of the ancestral tablets.
There were further orders now for Jia Rong:
‘I want you to go and ask your Aunt Lian whether she’s decided yet on which days
she’ll be entertaining in the New Year. If she has, get the office to make out a good,
clear list of the dates, so that we don’t have any duplicating this year. Last year
several families got invitations from both of us for the same day, and of course,
people being what they are, instead of realizing that it was a mistake, they assumed
that we had deliberately worked it out between us as an economy.’
Jia Rong hurried off to see Xi-feng, returning presently with the list of dates that his
father had asked for. After run?ning his eye over it, Cousin Zhen handed it to a
servant.
‘Give this to Lai Sheng. Tell him to avoid these dates when he sends out our New
Year invitations.’
He and Jia Rong went on to inspect operations in the hall, where a number of pages
were carrying in and arranging the large screens on which the portraits of the
ancestors were to be hung, and cleaning and polishing the tables and the ritual
vessels of gold and silver which were to be set up in front of them. While they were
thus engaged, a page came in holding a red greetings-card and a schedule containing
some sort of list.
‘Bailiff Wu from Black Mountain village, sir. He’s just arrived.’
‘That old rascal?’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘He’s been long enough getting here!’
Jia Rong took the greetings-card and schedule from the servant, and opening up the
card, held it out for his father to read. Cousin Zhen folded his hands behind his back
and bent over to read the inscription:

Wu Jin-xiao, Bailiff, presents his Humble Compliments
to the
Master and Mistress
and compliments to
The Young Gentlemen and Ladies
wishing you
Wealth, Health and Prosperity
Increase of Pay and Promotion
and
all your Heart’s Desire in the
Coming Year
Cousin Zhen laughed.
‘These country people have an original sense of style.’
‘Never mind the style,’ said Jia Rong, echoing his father’s laughter with obsequious
laughter of his own, ‘just think of all the good luck he is wishing us!’
He opened up the schedule and held it out while Cousin Zhen ran his eye down the
list:

         tufted deer                             30
         water deer                              50
         spotted deer                            50
         Siamese pigs                            20
         scalded pigs                            20
         wild boar                               20
         wild pigs                               20
         salted pigs                             20
         wild sheep                              20
         goats                                   20
         scalded sheep                                 20
         sheep, salted in fell                         20
         sturgeons                               200
         fish, various                           200
         live chickens, ducks and geese (each)                200
         dried ditto (each)                          200
         pheasants & hares (each)                    200 brace
         bear’s paws                             20 pairs
     deer’s sinews              20 catties
     sea-slugs         50 catties
     deer’s tongues 50
              ox-tongues
10
             dried mussels                                                           20
catties
             filberts, pine-nuts, peach-kernels, almonds (each)
    2 bags
crayfish                                                          50 pairs
dried shrimps                                                          200 catties
    high quality selected Silver Frost charcoal           1000 catties
medium grade ditto                           2000 catties
red charcoal                             30,000 catties
red Emperor rice                             5 bushels
green glutinous rice                         60 bushels
white ditto                                60 bushels
powder rice                                60 bushels
millet, sorghum & other grains (each)               60 bushels
general purpose rice                           2500 bushels
dried vegetables                           1 cartload
     Item, total realized from sales of livestock and cereals 2500 taels silver
Item, Present for the young ladies and gentlemen (Pets) 2 deer
           4 pair white rabbits
4 pair black rabbits
2 pair golden pheasants
     2 pair Foreign ducks


‘Bring him in,’ said Cousin Zhen when he had finished perusing the schedule.
Wu Jin-xiao promptly appeared. He knelt down in the courtyard below and had
already kotowed and called out his greetings before Cousin Then could have him
raised up and brought into the hall.
‘You are still hale and hearty then?’ Cousin Then asked him.
‘Yes, sir, thank you sir,’ said the old man, beaming. ‘I still manage to get about.’
‘Your sons must be quite big fellows by now,’ said Cousin Then. ‘Why don’t you let
them do the travelling for you?’
‘To tell you the truth, sir, I’m so used to the journey, I’d miss it now if I wasn’t to
come. Shouldn’t know what to do with myself. The boys would be only too glad to
come if I’d let them, of course—see what it’s like here “in the Emperor’s shadow” as
we say—but they’re only youngsters yet: I’d be afeared of them having some mishap
on the way. A few years longer and I shan’t need to worry.’
‘How many days have you been on the road?’ said Cousin Then.
‘Well, sir, as you know, there was a lot of snow this year: it must have been lying
three or four foot thick in places. And that sudden thaw we had coming on top of it
made the going very difficult. That must have put us back several days. It’s taken a
month and two days altogether. But I do assure you, sir, seeing that the time was
running out and knowing how anxious you’d be, we made as much speed as we
could.’
‘I was wondering what could have made you so late,’ said Cousin Then. ‘Well, I’ve
been looking at this list of yours. I see you’re holding out on me again this year, you
old devil.’

Wu Jin-xiao advanced a couple of steps—springing, as it were, to his own defence:
‘It’s like this, sir. The harvests this year have been really terrible. From the third
month to the eighth month it rained on and off all the time. I doubt we had six fine
days in a row together. Then in the ninth month we had hall as big as tea?cups. For
fifty miles around, the damage to crops and livestock—and houses and people as
well, for that matter—was terrible. That’s why I haven’t brought you more this year.
That’s the honest truth, sir. You know I wouldn’t lie to you.’
‘I’d reckoned on your bringing me at least five thousand taels,’ said Cousin Then,
frowning. ‘What am I supposed to do with an amount like this? We have only eight or
nine farms now and of those eight or nine two have declared themselves disaster
areas this year and aren’t contributing anything. With you holding back on me too, I
might as well give up celebrat?ing New Year altogether.’
‘Your lands have done better than some,’ said Wu Jin-xiao. ‘Take my cousin’s place.
That’s only thirty mile from where I am, but my word, what a difference! My cousin
manages eight farms for your relations at the other House. They’ve got several times
as much land as you, but the vittles he’s brought them this year are no more than
this lot here, and their cash yield on sales is no more than two or three thousand.
Now they really ha~ got something to make a fuss about.’
‘It’s true,’ said Cousin Then. ‘We’re not too badly off on this side. At least we
haven’t got any new major commitments outside our regular annual expenditure. For
us it’s a question of spending a bit more freely when we’re flush and economiz?ing a
bit when things are tighter. And even in the case of these New Year expenses, I
suppose I could cut down on them if I really had to. It would simply be a question of
brazening it out. But with our Rong-guo cousins it’s different. They’ve had all these
new expenses during the past few years, none of which were optional, but no new
source of income to set against them. Which means that for the past year or two
they’ve had to start eating into their capital. If you folk can’t help them to make up
the deficit, who else is there they turn to?’
‘I know they’ve got a lot on their plate,’ said Wu Jin-xiao with a knowing smile, ‘but
it can’t all be outgoings, can it? There must be something coming in as well. Surely
Her Grace and old Live-For-Ever must give them a hand-out once in a while?’
Cousin Then turned to Jia Rong with a laugh.
‘You heard that? Rich, isn’t it?’
Jia Rong tittered.
‘What does a countryman like you living at the back of beyond know about such
matters? You don’t suppose Her Grace has handed them the keys of the Emperor’s
treasury, do you? She’s not her own mistress, even if she wanted to. She does give
presents, of course, but it’s only on birthdays and feastdays and the like and never
more than a few lengths of figured satin or some curios or knick-knacks. Even when
she gives money, at the very most it will be a hundred gold. Now say a hundred gold
is worth a thousand silver taels—it can’t be much more than that—what possible
good can a thousand taels do them, when during each of the past two years they’ve
been forced to draw on their capital to the tune of several thousands a year? During
the first of those two years they had the Visitation—including the building of that
great garden. Just imagine what that must have cost them. Another two years like
these last two with another Visitation thrown in and they’ll be cleaned out!’
‘These simple country souls see “the bright outside but not the dark within”,’ said
Cousin Zhen. ‘The situation our Rong-?guo cousins are in is like the proverbial
chime-hammer made of phellodendron wood: imposing to look at but bitter inside.’
‘You can tell they really are hard-up,’ said Jia Rong half? jokingly. ‘The other day I
heard Auntie Lian plotting with Faithful to steal some of Lady Jia’s things to use as
security for a loan.’
‘No, I think that was merely our Feng being her usual artful self,’ said Cousin Then,
laughing. ‘They’re still not that poor. I expect she has noticed how much they have
been spending. beyond their means and is planning some economy or other. What
you overheard would simply have been her way of let?ting people know how
hard-up they are and preparing them for some cuts. I’ve got a rough idea of how
their finances stand at present and I assure you that they aren’t quite as desperate as
that yet.’
Concluding the conversation on this more reassuring note, Cousin Then gave Wu
Jin-xiao into the charge of the servants with instructions that he was to be properly
looked after and entertained. Our narrative does not follow the old man into the
servants’ quarters, however, but remains in the hall with Cousin Then.
Cousin Then had a portion of the things that Wu Jin-xiao had brought set aside to be
used as offerings to the ancestors; he had another portion set aside for sending to
Rong-guo House; and while Jia Rong attended to its delivery, he person?ally
supervised the selection of a third portion which he intended to keep for his own use.
What remained he had piled up in orderly heaps on the pavement beneath the hall
terrace to be shared out among the junior members of the clan, who were forthwith
invited to come and collect their shares.
At that point a large consignment of things arrived from the other mansion, most of
them things to be used in the an?cestral sacrifices, but some of them for Cousin Then
himself. Having given orders for their disposal, Cousin Then went back to his
supervision of the polishing and furniture-shifting in the hall. When that work was
completed, he put on a lynx-skin coat and went out, still in his slippers, on to the
terrace, where, having found himself a warm place under the eaves, he got the
servants to spread out a wolfskin rug for him so that he could sit there and watch the
young clansmen as they came to collect their shares. He noticed that Jia Qin was
among them.
‘What are you doing here?’ he called out to him. ‘Who told you to come?’
Jia Qin came over and stood in front of him, arms held submissively at his sides.
‘I heard that you were having a family share-out, Uncle, so I came along without
waiting to be called.’
‘These things I’m giving away now are intended for those of your uncles and
cousins who haven’t got jobs or private incomes to support them,’ said Cousin Then.
‘During the years when you were unemployed yourself, I used to give you a share of
the New Year things. But you aren’t unemployed now: you’ve got that supervisor’s
job that my Rong-guo cousins gave you, looking after those young nuns in the family
temple. Not only have you got a salary of your own, but you control all the nuns’
allowances as well. Yet still you come here for my things. You are too greedy. And just
look at you! No one would think from your appearance that you had money to spend
and a responsible position. You used to have the excuse that you had no money, but
what excuse have you got now? You look even more disreputable now than you did
when you were unemployed!’
‘I’ve got a big family to support,’ said Jia Qin. ‘I have a lot of expenses.’
‘Humbug!’ said Cousin Then. ‘I know what you get up to in that temple of yours,
don’t think I don’t! Once you set foot in that place, you are the master and nobody
there can gainsay you. With money to spend and the rest of us a long way away in
the city, you can do exactly as you like: invite the local riff raff in every night to
gamble with you and fill the place with your kept women and fancy boys. So having
squandered all the money and reduced yourself to the disgraceful state I see you in
now, you have the effrontery to try and get something out of me. All you are likely to
get out of me, young man, is a good stout stick across the shoulders! And when this
holiday is over, I shall make it my business to have a word with your Uncle Lian and
see to it that he has you recalled.’
Jia Qin reddened, but dared not say anything.
A servant came up then to report:
‘Someone with a present from the Prince of Bei-jing, sir. Two scrolls and a
perfume-bag.’
Cousin Then turned to Jia Rong.
‘Go and entertain him for me. Tell him I’m out.’
Jia Rong hurried off.
Cousin Zhen then dismissed Jia Qin, and having presided over the distribution until
all the things had been taken, re?turned to his own apartment to have his dinner
with You-shi.
Concerning the rest of that day and the night which fol?lowed our narrative is silent.
The day after that was even busier. But to give further details of these preparations
would be tedious. Suffice it to say that by the twenty-ninth of the twelfth month they
had been completed. In both mansions new door-gods had been pasted up on all the
doors, the inscribed boards at the sides and over the tops of gateways had been
repainted, and fresh ‘good luck’ slips—auspicious couplets written in the best
calligraphy on strips of scarlet paper—had been pasted up at the sides of all the
entrances. In the Ning-guo mansion the central doors of the main outer gate, of the
ornamental gate, of the outer reception hall, of the pavilion-gate, of the inner
reception hall, of the triple gate dividing the inner from the outer parts of the
mansion, and of the inner ornamental gate were all thrown Open, so that a way was
opened up from the street right through into the family hall inside. Red lanterns on
tall scarlet stands lined either side of this route. At dusk, when the candles in them
were lit, they took on the appearance of two long, parallel serpents of light,
undulating slightly where they ascended or descended the steps of terraces.
Next day, the last of the Old Year, Grandmother Jia and any of the Jia ladies who
possessed patents of nobility attired themselves in the court dress appropriate to
their rank and were borne in procession to the Palace, Grandmother Jia at the head
in a palanquin carried by eight bearers, to make their kotows to the Imperial
Concubine and felicitate her on the successful conclusion of the year. On their return
from the banquet which she gave them, their chairs were set down out?side the
pavilion-gate of the Ning-guo mansion, where those of the younger Jia males who
had not escorted them to the Palace were lined up on either side of the gateway
waiting to receive them. When the ladies had all alighted, the young men conducted
them on foot to the Jia family’s Hall of the An?cestors.
Bao-qin had never been inside this part of the mansion before. She was being
allowed in on this occasion by virtue of her recent adoption into the family and was
anxious to take in every detail in order that she might retain as accurate an
im?pression of it as possible.
The Jia family’s Hall of the Ancestors was in a separate courtyard of its own in the
west part of Ning-guo House, away from the more domestic parts of the mansion—a
court?yard that was entered through an imposing five-frame gateway behind a
black-lacquered wooden paling. An inscription in large characters hung over the
central arch of the gate:

ANCESTRAL TEMPLE
OF THE
JIA FAMILY
with a column of smaller characters in the lower left hand part of the board
indicating that the calligrapher was a direct descendant in the sixty-somethingth
generation of the Sage Confucius. A long couplet from the brush of the same
calli?grapher occupied the two vertical boards at the arch’s sides:

                 With loyal blood poured out willingly upon the ground
                 a myriad subjects pay tribute to their benevolent rulers

             For famous deeds lauded resoundingly to the skies
                  a hundred generations offer sacrifices to their heroic ancestors

Inside the gate a raised white marble walk shaded by an avenue of venerable pines
and cypresses led up to a terrace on which ancient bronze tripods were ranged. Over
the entrance to the temple’s vestibule, whose penthouse-roof swept forwards from
the main building’s fa?ade, hung a board framed in a carved and gilded border of
nine interlacing dragons and in?scribed in the Late Emperor’s calligraphy with the
following words:

HIS MINISTERS ARE AS SHINING STARS

The vertical inscriptions on either side were in the same Im?perial hand:

             Their achievements outshone the celestial luminaries
             Their fame is reflected in the generations that come after them

The board over the entrance to the main hall of the temple was framed by two
contending dragons and its inscription was of incised characters infilled in green.
Both it and the matching couplet below it were in the calligraphy of the reigning
sovereign:

HONOUR THE DEAD AND KEEP THEIR MEMORIAL

             Their sons and grandsons enjoy the fruits of their blessedness
             The common people recall Ning and Rong with kindness

Beyond the flickering brilliance of many lights and the glint and sheen of drapes and
hangings Bao-qin could make out some of the spirit tablets of the ancestors, but not
very clearly.
By ancient custom the menfolk were divided in ranks to left and right of the hall so
that each generation was on a different side from the one which followed it, fathers
and sons separ?ated, grandfathers and grandsons together. Jia Jing presided over the
sacrifice with Jia She acting as his assistant; Cousin Then held the drink-offering; Jia
Lian and Jia Cong the silk-offering; Bao-yu carried the incense; Jia Chang and Jia Ling
unrolled the kneeling-mat in front of the great incense-burner Then the black-coated
musicians struck up and the ceremony began.: the threefold offering of the Cup, the
standings, kneel?ings and prostrations, the burning of the silk-offering, the
libation—every movement precisely in time to the solemn strains of the music. The
music ceased at the same time as the ceremony, and the participants filed out and,
grouping them?selves round Grandmother Jia, conducted her to the main hall of the
Ning-guo mansion where, under the richly-embroidered frieze which hung high in
front of them, against a background of brilliantly-decorated screens, high above the
smoking in?cense and flickering candles of the altar, the portraits of the ancestors
hung, those of the ducal siblings, Ning-guo and Rong-guo, resplendent in dragon
robes and jade-encrusted belts, in the centre and somewhat raised above the rest.
The men ranged themselves in ascending order of seniority in the space between the
hall and the ornamental gate, so that the two most junior ones, Jia Xing and Jia Zhi,
were just inside the gate and the two most senior ones, Jia jing and Jia She, were at
the top of the terrace steps and under the eaves of the hall. The womenfolk of the
family were ranged inside the hall in corresponding ranks but in reverse order: that is
to say, the most junior were nearest the threshold and the most senior furthest
inside the hall, but whereas the senior male in a generation was at the east end of his
row, the senior female in the same generation would be at the west end of hers, and
vice versa. The male domestics of all ages were ranged in the courtyard on the
further side of the ornamental gate.
The manner of making the offerings was as follows: Each ‘course’ was passed from
hand to hand by the servants until it reached the ornamental gate. There it was
received by Jia Xing and Jia Zhi and passed on from hand to and until it reached Jia
Jing at the top of the terrace steps. Jia Rong, as senior grandson of the senior branch
of the family, was permitted, alone of all the males, to stand inside the threshold
with the women. He received the dishes from his grandfather Jia Jing’s hands and
passed them to his wife, Hu-shi. Hu-shi passed them to the row ending in Xi-feng and
You-shi, who passed them forwards to Lady Wang standing at the side of the altar.
Lady Wang then put them into the hands of Grandmother Jia, who raised them up
reverently towards the portraits before laying them down on the altar in front of her.
Lady Xing stood to the west of the altar facing eastwards and helped her lay them
down. When meat, vegetables, rice, soup, cakes, wine and tea had all been
transmitted to the altar by this human chain and offered up there by Grandmother
Jia and her two daughters-?in-law, Jia Rong withdrew and took up his position next to
Jia Qin in the courtyard below, at the head of the most junior generation of Jia family
males.
Now came the most solemn part of the ceremony. As Grandmother Jia, clasping a
little bundle of burning joss sticks with both her hands, knelt down for the
incense-offering, the entire congregation of men and women, rank upon rank of
them, close-packed as flowers in a flower-bed, knelt down in perfect time with her
and proceeded to go through the motions of the Great Obeisance. This was done
with such silent concentration that, from five-frame hall and three-frame vestibule,
from portico and terrace, terrace steps and courtyard, for some minutes nothing
could be heard but the faint tinkling made by jade girdle-pendants and tiny golden
bells and the soft scrape and scuffle of cloth-soled boots and shoes.
The ceremony over, Jia Jing, Jia She and the rest of the menfolk hurried back to the
Rong-guo mansion so that they could be waiting there in readiness to make their
kotows to Grandmother Jia on her return.
In You-shi’s main reception-room, whither the ladies re?paired now from the hall, the
floor had been entirely covered with a great red carpet and a huge gold cloisonné
incense-burner with a loach-lipped rim and three massive legs shaped like the trunks
of elephants stood in the middle.
In the centre of the kang—also new-carpeted, but in scarlet—a dark-red back-rest
had been placed with a design showing a couchant dragon coiled around the
character for ‘longevity’. Large bolsters of the same colour and with the same design
on them had been placed as arm-rests at right-angles to it; for extra warmth a black
fox-fur had been draped around the top of it, and there was a white fox-fur mg
between the bolsters, for sitting on. When Grandmother Jia had been installed on
this furry throne, several old great aunts were invited to sit on fur rugs that had been
spread out on the kang to left and right of it. Lady Xing, Lady Wang and other ladies
of their generation were installed on fur rugs on a smaller kang in an alcove-room to
the side of the main kang and discreetly separated from it by an openwork wooden
screen. On the floor below, in two facing rows, were a dozen carved lacquer chairs,
on which Bao-qin and the other cousins were invited to sit. They had chair-backs and
seat-covers of squirrel, and large copper foot-warmers in place of footstools.
You-shi and her daughter-in-law Hu-shi now appeared with tea-trays in their hands,
and while You-shi offered tea to Grandmother Jia, Hu-shi served the old aunties.
After that You-shi passed into the alcove and served tea to Lady Xing and the other
ladies on the smaller kang, and Hu-shi served the cousins sitting in chairs below.
Xi-feng, Li Wan and a few other young married women of their generation, debarred
from taking tea either with the elder ladies or with their young unmarried cousins,
stood idly by, on the floor below the kang, ‘in attendance’. Lady Xing and her group,
as soon as they had finished drinking their tea, rose and moved over to where
Grandmother Jia was sitting on the kang so that they too might be ‘in attendance’.
After exchanging a few words with the other old ladies while she sipped her tea,
Grandmother Jia gave orders for her palanquin to be made ready. At once Xi-feng
climbed up on to the kang and began helping her to her feet.
‘But we’ve already prepared dinner for you here,’ said You?-shi. ‘You never stay
with us for dinner on New Year’s Eve. Won’t you make an exception just this once?
Surely my cater?ing can’t be all that inferior to Feng’s?’
Xi-feng continued to help Grandmother Jia from the kang. ‘Come on, Grannie, let’s be
getting home! Pay no attention to lien’
Grandmother Jia laughed.
‘You’re so busy with the sacrifices,’ she said. ‘You’re worked off your feet as it is; I’m
sure you don’t want the bother of feeding me as well. Besides, in past years when I
haven’t stayed, you have Sent the food over to me. Why don’t you do that again this
year? I don’t feel like eating very much now; but if you send it over, I shall be able to
save it up for tomorrow, and then I shall be able to eat more of it than I could now.’
This made everyone laugh.
‘See that you get someone thoroughly dependable to sit up and keep an eye on the
candles tonight,’ Grandmother Jia said by way of parting admonition. ‘Where fire is
concerned, one can’t afford to take chances.’
You-shi, escorting her meanwhile from the room, assured her that she would do so.
At the pavilion-gate You-shi and the other ladies hid them-selves behind the
gate-screen from the eyes of the waiting menservants while Grandmother Jia got into
her palanquin. Pages of the Ning-guo mansion went ahead of the bearers and, as
they approached the outer gate, directed them through the centre of its three
gateways. Lady Xing and Lady Wang fol?lowed in their less imposing conveyances,
accompanied by You-shi, who was also going over to the other mansion.
Outside, while they were being borne in a westerly direction down the street, the
ladies could see the achievements, in?signia and musical instruments (bells, gongs,
stone-chimes and drums hung in magnificently carved, painted and tasselled stands)
of the Dukes of Ning-guo and Rong-guo, those of the Duke of Ning-guo along the
eastern half of the street outside the south wall of the Ning-guo property, and those
of his brother-duke outside the Rong-guo wall to its west.
As in the other mansion, the centre-gates throughout Rong-?guo House were all
thrown open so that a way was clear from the outer gate right through to the Hall of
Exalted Felicity inside. But this time, instead of going through to the pavilion-gate and
getting out there, they turned left after the outer reception hall and were carried to
the main reception hall in Grandmother Jia’s part of the mansion. The others
assembled round the old lady as they got out of their sedans and followed her into
the hall. Here, too, everything had been transformed: brilliantly embroidered screens
and cushions specially brought out for the occasion and an incense-burner set down
in the middle of the room from which emanated delicious odours of pine and cedar
and Hundred Blend aromatic.
As soon as Grandmother Jia was seated, a venerable nannie came up to her to report
that ‘the old ladies had arrived to make their kotow’ and she hurriedly got up again
and ad?vanced to welcome two or three elderly female relations who had just come
into the hall. A good deal of polite tussling ensued, accompanied on both sides by
laughter and protesta?tions, as Grandmother Jia took the hands of each old lady in
turn and, while the old ladies pretended that they were struggling to kneel, made a
great show of struggling to pre?vent them—for although Grandmother Jia was their
senior, they were in the same generation as her and too elderly to be allowed to
kotow in earnest. They sat down for a while after that and took a cup of tea; then
Grandmother Jia saw them out, but no farther than the inner ornamental gate.
When she had returned and was once more enthroned on the principal seat in the
hall, Jia Jing and Jia She came forward with all the menfolk in the family in rows
behind them to make their kotow.
‘You all do so much for me during the year,’ Grandmother Jia protested. ‘Can’t we
forget about the kotow?’
But nobody heeded her. Rank upon rank of them, the males in one large group and
the females in another, knelt down together and bowed their foreheads to the
ground. After that folding chairs were brought and put down in a row to left and right
of Grandmother Jia’s seat and the next most senior members of the family sat down
and received their kotows, and so on by order of seniority downwards, until all but
the most junior members of the family had been kotowed to; but now even their
turn arrived and they too were allowed to sit down as the domestics of both
households, men-servants and women-servants, pages and maids, came in by order
of their various ranks and duties and made their kotows to their em?ployers.
After that the New Year’s Eve wish-penny was distributed to servants and
children—gold or silver medallions in little embroidered purses—and the New Year’s
love-feast was laid, tables on the east side of the hall for men and boys, tables on the
west side for girls and women. There was herb-flavoured New Year’s Eve wine and
love-feast soup, there were lucky-?cakes and wish-puddings; and when all had eaten
and drunk, Grandmother Jia rose and went into an inner room to change out of her
Court dress, which she had all this time been wear?ing. This was a signal for the
others present to disperse.
As darkness came on, offerings of cakes and burning joss? sticks were made in front
of all the Buddha-shrines and in all the little niches of the Kitchen God, who is
welcomed back this night from his annual trip aloft. In the main courtyard, outside
Lady Wang’s apartment, an ‘altar to heaven and earth’ was set up - a long table on
which offerings of sticky fried honey-sticks and fresh apples and steamed wheat-flour
cakes and other goodies had been built up, layer upon layer, into a little pagoda of
offerings in front of a large colour-print representing the whole host of heaven (or as
much of it as the artist had been able to fit in). Great horn lanterns hung at either
side of the main entrance to Prospect Garden to illuminate the gateway, and
innumerable standard lamps lit up its alley-ways and courtyards and walks. As for the
inhabitants of the mansion, all of them, both masters and servants, seemed, in their
dazzling holiday array, like walking flower-gardens of brilliant embroidery and
brocade. And all night long a confused hubbub of talking and shouting and laughter
arose, punctuated by the continual, unceasing pops and bangs of exploding
firecrackers.
At four o’clock in the morning, as the drums of the fifth watch were sounding,
Grandmother Jia and the other ladies once more got into their court dresses and
were borne in pro?cession to the Palace, this time to felicitate Yuan-chun on the
advent of the New Year. Livened footmen walked ahead of them carrying the full
paraphernalia to which Grandmother Jia’s rank entitled her. Once more Yuan-chun
feasted them; once more, on their return from the Palace, they made offer?ings to
the ancestors in their shrine in the Ning-guo mansion; and once more, on returning
to her own apartment in Rong-?guo House, Grandmother Jia received the
prostrations of the assembled family. As soon as that was over, she changed out of
her court clothes and declared that she was going to rest, refusing to see any of the
friends and relations who now began arriving in great numbers to offer their New
Year felicitations, and spending her time either quietly conversing with Aunt Xue and
Mrs Li or, as an occasional diversion, playing games of cards or Racing Go with Bao-yu
and the girls.
But Lady Wang and Xi-feng, on both this and each of the seven or eight days which
followed, were kept busy entertain?ing the guests whom the family had invited to
drink their New Year wine. In both the reception hall and the courtyard out?side it
there were plays to watch and tables at which the un?ending stream of visitors could
sit for a while and eat and drink while they watched them.
And no sooner was that lot of entertaining over than another lot had to be prepared
for as the First Moon waxed greater and the Lantern Festival drew near. Again the
Ning and Rong mansions were gay with lanterns and decorations. On the eleventh of
the month Jia She entertained Grand-mother Jia and the rest of the family and on the
twelfth it was Cousin Zhen’s turn to play host, while for several days run?ning Lady
Wang and Wang Xi-feng were most of the time out visiting one or other of the
innumerable families from whom they bad received invitations.
On the evening of the fifteenth Grandmother Jia had tables laid for a feast in her big
‘new’ reception hall—the scene of Xi-feng’s fateful birthday-feast. A stage was set up
for a troupe of child-actors which she had specially hired for this occasion, and both
the stage and hall were hung all over with lanterns of every imaginable shape and
colour. When her preparations were completed, she summoned all her children and
grandchildren, nephews and nieces, great-nephews and great-nieces to a family
feast.
As a matter of fact it is not strictly true that all of them were invited. Jia Jing was, for
religious reasons, a total abstainer from meat and strong drink, so he was not invited.
Obligations to the dead rather than to the living had brought him back for the holiday,
and on the seventeenth, two days after this, as soon as the last of the ancestral
sacrifices was over, he returned to his Taoist monastery outside the city and the
briefly inter?rupted pursuit of immortality. Meanwhile, when not actually engaged in
discharging ceremonial duties, he spent all the time on his own in a quiet,
out-of-the-way corner of the mansion, in a state of incommunicado with the other
members of the family.
And Jia She, although he was invited, excused himself as soon as he had received a
party-gift from his mother. She knew that he felt uncomfortable in her presence and
did not attempt to detain him. Back in his own quarters, surrounded by cronies and
dependants, he could drink and admire the lan?terns while beautiful young women
played and sang for his delectation:

         Ears with pipes and songs beguiled,
         Eyes by silk skirts hypnotized.


—A different scene altogether from the one he had just left.
But let us return to the latter—to the reception hall in Grandmother Jia’s rear
courtyard, where a covered stage had been erected to accommodate the players.
Inside the hall some dozen or more tables had been laid facing outwards towards the
stage. They were arranged in a fan shape, with the two central tables in the place of
honour at the back and the rest of them raying out forwards to left and right of them.
At the side of each table a smaller, ornamental table had been placed on which were
arranged
1. a little three-piece incense set (a vase, a cassolette and a tripod, all made on a
miniature scale out of metal) in which Hundred Blend aromatic—a gift from the
Palace—was burn?ing;
2. a porcelain dish, eight inches long, four or five inches wide and two or three inches
deep, containing a miniature landscape made out of stones and mosses;
3. a small japanned tea-tray on which was one of Grand?mother Jia’s best china
teacups and a little individual mille fiori teapot in which choicest tea was brewing;
4. a little table-screen of red silk gauze, embroidered with flowers and appropriate
lines of ‘grass character’ verse, framed in a delicately carved pierced-work
sandalwood frame;*
5. a vase (each one a collector’s piece and each different from the rest) containing
the three friends winter’ or riches in a jade hall’ or some other flower arrangement,
mostly of fresh flowers that had been specially forced for the occasion.
The two tables in the place of honour at the back were occupied by Aunt Xue and
Mrs Li. To their left, at the head of the row of tables radiating outwards towards the
east side of the hall, there was a large, low wooden settle with a carved pierced-work
back of interlacing dragons, which had

* Stone’s Note to Reader:
These screens were embroidered by a Soochow girl called Hui-niang, who, as
member of a highly-cultivated Service family and an accomplished amateur painter
and calligrapher, embroidered only occasionally for her own diversion and not as a
means of making money. As the flowers embroidered on them were all copied from
flower-paintings by famous masters, their design and colouring were far superior to
the cruder, more garish productions of professional embroiderers; and the
accompanying verses, all chosen with impeccable taste from a wide range of literary
sources, were executed in black embroidery-silk with such consummate skill that
every hook and squiggle, every variation in thickness of line, every join and break in
the brush-written ‘grass script’ calligraphy was exactly reproduced, not mangled and
deformed as in the stilted, wooden attempts at copying of the commercial
embroiderer.
Since Hui-niang did not depend on her embroidery for a living, speci?mens of it,
despite its great fame, have always been hard to come by. Even among the rich and
great there are very few households which can boast a specimen. Such as do exist
are referred to by collectors as ‘Hui em?broidery’. But what are sometimes sold as
specimens of ‘Hui embroidery’ today invariably turn out to be imitations deliberately
made to take in the inexpert buyer. The real Hui-niang died tragically at the age of
eighteen, and there are in fact no genuine specimens of her work now to be had,
since the few houses which posse as a piece or two hold on to them tena?ciously and
refuse to part with them to would-be purchasers. Indeed, if a genuine specimen of
Hui-niang’s work were ever to come upon the market, its value would be incalculable.
The Jia family originally possessed three, of which two had been presented as a gift
to the Emperor only a year previously, leaving this set of sixteen little table-screens,
to which Grandmother Jia was so much attached that she kept them always in her
own apartment, unwilling that they should remain with the stock of objects
commonly drawn on for the family’s entertainment of guests, and only rarely, on
occasions of her own devising, brought them out to be admired.
Stone
been put there for Grandmother Jia to lie on. It was furnished with a back-rest and
bolsters and was large enough to have a fur rug spread out on it and still leave room
at one end for a small, exquisitely gilded table of foreign make on which had been
placed a teapot, a teacup, a spittoon, a napkin and, among various other small
objects, an eyeglass-case. Grandmother Jia rested with her feet up on the settle and,
after talking for a while with the company, took out the eyeglasses from their case
and looked through them at the stage.
‘I do hope you will forgive me for lying down like this in your presence,’ she
apologized to Aunt Xue and Mrs Li. ‘It’s very rude of me, I know, but I’m getting so
rheumaticky in my old age?
She made Amber get up on to the settle beside her and massage her legs by gently
pounding them with a ‘maiden’s fist’—a sort of short-handled mallet with a padded
leather head.
No feaster’s table with cover and drapes had been put in front of the settle, only the
little ornamental table with the table-screen and the incense set and vase of flowers.
The very elegant, somewhat larger table of normal height which would have been
hers if she had been sitting up with the rest had been placed somewhat to the left of
the settle and laid with wine-cups, soup-spoons and chopsticks for four. It was
occupied by Bao-qin, Xiang-yun, Dai-yu and Bao-yu. Although she could not sit with
them, Grandmother Jia kept up a pretence that they were eating together: each dish
as it arrived would be submitted to her inspection, and if she fancied it, would be
placed on the little table at her elbow; then, when she had tasted it, it would be
removed and set down in front of the four young people for them to finish.
After Grandmother Jia and her four grandchildren, the next along on the east side
was Lady Xing; after her came Lady Wang, then You-shi, then Li Wan, then Xi-feng,
and lastly Jia Rong’s wife, Hu-shi. Along the west side Bao-chai came first, next to her
mother, then Li Wen, then Li Qi, then Xiu-yan, then Ying-chun, then Tan-chun and
then Xi-chun.
Red-tasselled glass lanterns hung in rows from the beams overhead to left and right
of the diners. In front of them, on each of their tables, was an ingenious light
consisting of a flower-shaped candle attached to the base of a reflector in the form of
a vertical lotus leaf. These lotus leaves, though made of metal, were so skillfully
engraved and enamelled that they looked almost real. They were attached to their
metal stands by means of a swivel, so that the beams of the candle could be
concentrated in any direction desired. When all the reflectors were simultaneously
directed towards the stage, the diners’ view of the players was wonderfully
improved.
The wooden partitions with their window-lattices and doors which normally
separated the hall from the verandah had been removed and great palace lanterns of
glass, whose elaborately carved wooden frames were hung with strings of crimson
tassels, were suspended at intervals in the space thus created. More rows of
lanterns—lanterns of every kind of material and design— horn lanterns, glass
lanterns, gauze lanterns, lanterns of Yunnan glitter-glass, embroidered ones, painted
ones, lan?terns with cut-outs of paper or silk in them, hung in lines under the
verandah eaves, both inside and outside the archi?traves, and from the eaves of the
loggias on either side of the courtyard.
The tables on the verandah were all occupied by males: Cousin Zhen, Jia Lian, Jia
Huan, Jia Cong, Jia Rong, Jia Qin, Jia Yun, Jia Ling and Jia Chang.
Although Grandmother Jia had sent invitations by word of mouth to every clansman
and clanswoman residing in the city, some of them were too elderly to stand up to
the noise and excitement of a party, some were unable to come because they had no
one to look after the house for them while they were away, some had intended to
come but were prevented from doing so by illness, some stayed away from envy of
their richer clansmen or because they were ashamed of their own poverty, others
because they could not stand Xi-feng, and yet others because they were so unused to
company and in?capacitated by shyness that they dared not come—in short,
although the clan was a numerous one, for one reason or another, of all those invited
the only female guest who turned up was Lou-shi, mother of Bao-yu’s former
classmate, the intrepid little Jia Jun, who came bringing Jia Jun with her, and the only
male ones were those who had found employ?ment with the family under Xi-feng’s
auspices and were there-fore obliged to put in an appearance: Jia Qin, Jia Yun, Jia
Chang and Jia Ling. Yet even with the absence of so many who had been invited from
outside, for a family party the company was a large one.
Presently, while they all sat watching the players, Lin Zhi?-xiao’s wife came into the
hall leading six other women, each pair of whom were carrying between them a
small kang-table covered with a red felt top on which was a bundle of strung cash:
hundreds and hundreds of newly-minted copper coins, specially chosen for size and
quality, fastened together by a single long cord of crimson silk. Under the direction of
Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife two of these tables were set down in front of Mrs Li and Aunt Xue
and the third one beside Grandmother Jia’s settle.
‘Do it in the middle, where everyone can see’ said Grand?mother Jia.
The women all knew what was expected of them. Setting the tables down in the
centre of the hall, they simultaneously undid the ends of the crimson cords with
which the money was fastened and began pulling them out so that the coins tumbled
in heaps upon the tables.
The play being performed on this occasion was The House in Pin-kang Lane, and the
actors had just come to the end of that section of it called ‘Meeting in the Sickroom’.
The hero Yu Shu-ye, having at last met the love of his life only to be called by stern
duty from her side, had just left the stage in chagrin. At this point the child-actor
playing the part of his little page Leopard Boy, observing what was going on in the
hall, began to extemporize:
‘You can go off in a huff if you like; but today is the fifteenth of the first month and
did Lady Jia of Rong-guo House is holding a family party; so what lam going to do is to
get on this horse and gallop there as quickly as I can and ask them for some
sweeties!’
This caused Grandmother Jia and the rest of the audience to burst out laughing.
‘That’s a sharp little fellow,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘How sweet!’
‘And he’s barely nine,’ said Xi-feng.
‘Barely nine!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘And being able to come out with it so pat!’
She nodded in the direction of the waiting women.
‘Largesse!’
Three of the women had already provided themselves with small shallow baskets in
readiness for this order. At the word of command they walked up to the little tables,
shovelled up basketfuls of coins from the heaped-up money, and took them outside
to the foot of the stage which Leopard Boy had just vacated.
‘Largesse from Lady Jia, Mrs Xue and Mrs Li for Leopard Boy to buy himself some
sweets with,’ said one of the women.
The three of them then discharged the contents of their baskets upon the stage. The
money landed with a mighty clatter and at once the whole stage was covered with
shining pennies.
Cousin Then had ordered his own pages to have a large flat basket of money ready
for his own largesse to the players.
But you will have to wait for the next volume, gentle reader, in order to find out
whether they received it.
EXPLICIT SECUNDA PARS LAPIDIS HISTORIAE



CHAPTER 54

Lady Jia ridicules the cliches of romantic fiction
And Wang Xi-feng emulates the filial antics
of Lao Lai-zi



TO CONTINUE OUR STORY:

Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian had secretly instructed their pages to have a large
flat-bottomed basket of largesse-money in readiness, and when they heard
Grandmother Jia call out ‘Largesse!’, they told the pages to take this basket and
empty it onto the stage. The money showered down on the boards with a
tremendous ringing clatter, which greatly delighted the old lady.
The two men now rose to their feet. A page hurried forward and handed Jia Lian a
silver kettle of freshly-heated wine on a tray. Taking the kettle, Jia Lian followed his
cousin into the hall. Cousin Zhen went first to Mrs Li, bowed, took her wine-cup and,
turning back, handed it to Jia Lian to fill. Then he did the same for Aunt Xue. The two
ladies stood up, meanwhile, politely demurring:
‘Please, gentlemen, go back to your seats! You are too polite!’
With the exception of the four senior ladies - Aunt Xue, Mrs Li, Lady Xing and Lady
Wang - all the females present now left their seats and stood, hands at their sides,
while Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian went over to the couch on which Grandmother Jia
reclined. As it was rather a low one, the two men knelt to serve her. The other males,
who had followed them into the hall and were standing a little behind them drawn
up in their order of seniority, with Jia Cong at their head, seeing Cousin Zhen and Jia
Lian kneel, knelt down in a row behind them, whereupon Bao-yu hurriedly rose from
his chair and knelt down as well. Xiang-yun nudged him, amused.


‘What do you want to kneel down with them for?’ she whispered. ‘If you’re feeling
so polite all of a sudden, it would be more to the point to get up and serve everyone
your-self.’
‘So I shall, presently,’ Bao-yu whispered back at her.
The two men had now finished serving Grandmother Jia and gone on to serve Lady
Xing and Lady Wang.
‘What about the young ladies?’ Cousin Zhen inquired when these last two had
been attended to.
‘No, no, go and sit down now I’ Grandmother Jia and the senior ladies cried. ‘Spare
them the formality.’
At this Cousin Zhen and the other males withdrew.
It was now about ten o’clock and the play being performed
- the ‘Feast of Lanterns’ section from The Orphan’s Revenge -had reached a climax of
noise and excitement. Bao-yu tried to slip out unnoticed under cover of the din, but
his grand-mother had spotted him.
‘Where are you going?’ she called. ‘There are a lot of fire?works about outside.
Mind a piece of burning touch-paper doesn’t fall on you and set you alight!’
‘I’m not going very far,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I’ll be back directly.’
Grandmother Jia ordered some of the old nannies present to go after him and see
that he was all right. Observing that he had only Musk and Ripple and a couple of
little junior maids in attendance, she asked what had become of Aroma.
‘That girl is getting above herself,’ she said. ‘Sending the younger maids to stand in
for her! - What next?’
Lady Wang rose hastily in Aroma’s defence.
‘It is only a few days since her mother died. She is still in mourning for her mother.
It wouldn’t be right for her to go out in company yet.’
Grandmother Jia nodded, but seemed to have second thoughts:
‘That’s all very well, but bereavement shouldn’t make any difference where a
master or mistress is concerned. Suppose she had still been working for me: do you
think she would have stayed away then? One doesn’t want this sort of thing to
become a precedent.’
Xi-feng came to her aunt’s assistance:
‘Even if she weren’t in mourning, she would still need to be keeping an eye on
things. Tonight, with lanterns and fire-works everywhere, there is a terrible danger of
fire. Whenever we have plays, the people from the Garden all come sneaking over
here to watch. It’s just as well to have one careful person like Aroma left behind
there who can go round making sure that everything is all right. Besides, she’ll be
able to see that everything is ready for Bao-yu so that he can go straight to bed when
he gets back. If she were here, you can be sure that no one else would bother. He
would go back to find his bedding cold, and there would be no hot water for his tea
or anything else ready for him. I’m afraid I took it for granted that you would prefer
her not to come; but if you want her here, Grannie, I can easily go and fetch her for
you.’
‘No, no, don’t fetch her,’ said Grandmother Jia hurriedly. ‘You have obviously given
the matter more thought than I. There’s only one thing, though. When did her
mother die? Why didn’t I get to hear about it?’
‘But Aroma came to tell you about it herself,’ said Xi-feng, smiling. ‘Surely you can’t
have forgotten already?’
Grandmother Jia thought for a bit.
‘Yes, I do seem to remember something about it. I’m afraid my memory isn’t up to
much these days.’
‘You can’t remember everything’ the others said reassuringly.
Grandmother Jia sighed:
‘She served me all those years when she was a little girl, then she was with Yun for
a while, and during these past few years she’s had that holy terror who left a
moment ago to put up with. I remember thinking at the time that we owe the girl a
bit of kindness - especially as she’s not one of our own home-reared servants but one
who came to us from outside - and meaning to ask them to give her something
towards the funeral when I heard that her mother had died, but I’m afraid that
afterwards I forgot.’
‘It’s already been taken care of,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Lady Wang gave her forty taels for
funeral expenses the other day.’
Grandmother Jia nodded:
‘Ah well, that’s all right then. As a matter of fact Faithful lost her mother too, quite
recently. I couldn’t let her go to the funeral because her parents were living in the
South. Since she and Aroma are both in mourning, why don’t we let her go and join
Aroma? The two of them can keep each other company.’
She ordered some of the women in attendance to make a selection of the cakes and
other delicacies they had been eating and take them for Faithful to eat with Aroma in
Green Delights.
‘You’re a bit late with your suggestion,’ said Amber, laughing. ‘Faithful went over to
Aroma’s place hours ago!’
This remark concluded the discussion and the company’s briefly distracted attention
returned now to the business of drinking and watching the play.

*

After leaving the party, Bao-yu made his way straight through to the Garden. The old
women whom his grandmother had sent after him, realizing that he must be
returning to his own apartment, did not accompany him inside but slipped into the
tea-kitchen of the gatehouse to warm themselves at the stove and avail themselves
of the opportunity for some surreptitious drinking and a hand or two of cards.
On entering his courtyard Bao-yu found Green Delights ablaze with lights but silent as
the grave.
‘Surely they can’t all have gone to bed?’ said Musk. ‘Let’s go in quietly and make
them jump.’
Bao-yu and the four girls tiptoed through the outer room and peeped through the
apertures of the mirror-wall into the room within. Aroma and another girl were lying
facing each other on the nearer side of the kang. At the further end two or three old
women appeared to be taking a nap. Bao-yu was just about to push open the
mirror-door and enter when the sound of a sigh came from the direction of the kang
and he could hear the voice of Faithful speaking:
‘You see, you can never be sure of anything in this life. Look at you, f6r example, on
your own here with a free family living outside, never sure from one year to the next
where they might move to: you never expected to be with your mother at the end,
did you? Yet it just so happened that this year she was living near at hand and you
were able to be a good daughter to her when she died.’
‘It’s true,’ said Aroma. ‘When I first came here, I didn’t think I’d ever see my mother
again. And do you know, when I went to tell Her Ladyship that she’d passed away, she
gave me forty taels for funeral expenses. She couldn’t have done more for me if I’d
been her own daughter. It’s certainly more than I’d have dared hope for.’
Bao-yu turned back and whispered to Musk and the others behind him:
‘It’s Faithful in there with her. I didn’t think she’d be here. If I go inside now, she’s
sure to rush off in a huff - she always does nowadays when she sees me. We’d better
go away again and leave the two of them in peace. Aroma must have been pretty
miserable on her own. It’s nice that she’s got Faithful with her to talk to.’
He tiptoed out again and taking his stand behind a rock, began hitching up his clothes.
Musk and Ripple, who were standing behind him, suppressed a giggle:
‘Why don’t you squat down to take off your underthings? You’ll get the wind on
your belly, standing up like that!’
The two junior maids who had been following behind Musk and Ripple, as soon as
they saw the reason for the halt, hurried off to the tea-kitchen for hot water to wash
his hands.
Bao-yu had finished and was just turning back to the waiting maids when two
women servants appeared, walking in his direction. Seeing this dark figure lurking
amongst the rocks, they loudly demanded who it was.
‘It’s Bao-yu,’ said Ripple. ‘Don’t shout at him like that, you’ll scare the daylights out
of him!’
‘Oh I am sorry,’ said the woman who had shouted. ‘What an awful thing to do - and
today of all days! How are you, young ladies? Having a nice holiday? You certainly
deserve it, after all your work during the rest of the year.’
As they came closer, Musk asked them what they were carrying.
‘It’s some things from Her Old Ladyship for Miss Faithful and Miss Aroma,’ said the
woman. ‘She suddenly thought of them, while she was watching the play.’
‘Oh?’ said Ripple. ‘I thought it was The Orphan’s Revenge they were watching, not
The Magic Casket!’
‘Take the lids off and let’s have a look,’ said Bao-yu.
The two women squatted on their haunches and held out the food-boxes while Musk
and Ripple took off the lids. Bao-yu leaned over and looked into them. Each one
contained a selection of the very choicest of the various sweet and savoury
confections they had been eating at the party. He nodded approvingly before
hurrying on. Musk and Ripple threw down the lids - somewhat carelessly - and
hurried after him.
‘Now those two women seemed very nice,’ said Bao-yu. ‘They were certainly very
civil. Think how hard they must work every day, Yet they could still say those nice
things about you - none of that boasting about how busy they are and how much
they do for us that you get from some of these people.’
‘Oh, those two are all right,’ said Musk. ‘Some of them are really terrible, though.’
‘They can’t help being stupid,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Being more intelligent than they are,
you ought to feel sorry for them. You only have to be a bit more forebearing with
them and they’d give you no trouble.’
While he was speaking, they were passing through the gate?way of the Garden. The
old women drinking and playing cards in the tea-kitchen had been taking it in turns
to get up and peep outside so as not to be taken off their guard, and seeing Bao-yu
through the gate, they came hurrying out after him.
In the gallery leading to the hall where the party was he came upon the two little
maids who had gone to fetch hot water. They had been waiting there for some time,
one with a basin of water, the other with a towel over her arm and a pot of hand
lotion. Ripple first tested the water with her hand.
‘The older you grow the more stupid you get,’ she said to the girl. ‘This water is
stone cold.’
‘Blame the weather, miss,’ said the girl. ‘I was afraid the water would cool quickly
so I poured it out boiling from the kettle, but you see it makes no difference.’
Just at that moment an old woman chanced to be passing by with a kettle full of
freshly-boiled water.
‘Here, missus,’ the girl with the basin called after her, ‘do us a favour! Come over
and pour some in this basin, will you?’
‘This is for Her Old Ladyship’s tea,’ said the old woman. ‘Go and get some yourself,
young lady - walking won’t spoil your feet!’
‘I don’t care who it’s for,’ said Ripple, ‘but if you won’t pour that water out for her, I
shall come and do it my?self.’
The old woman turned. Recognizing Ripple, she hurriedly lifted the kettle up and
poured some water into the basin.
‘That’s enough,’ said Ripple. ‘Really, a person of your age ought to have more sense!
We know it’s Her Old Ladyship’s. Do you suppose we’d have dared ask for it if we
weren’t entitled to?’
The old woman smiled apologetically:
‘My eyesight’s not too good. I didn’t recognize this young lady as one of yours.’
When Bao-yu had finished washing, the other girl poured some of the lotion onto his
palm and he rubbed it into his hands. Ripple and Musk took advantage of the hot
water to wash their own hands too, and after rubbing a little of the lotion into them,
followed Bao-yu back into the hall.
Calling for a kettle of warm wine, Bao-yu now took his turn at pouring for the ladies,
beginning with Mrs Li and Aunt Xue. They protested smilingly and begged him to go
back to his seat, but Grandmother Jia insisted that he should pour for them.
‘He’s young,’ she said. ‘Let him do it. But let us empty our cups first for this round.’
She drained her winecup as she said this. Lady Xing and Lady Wang followed suit and
the other two ladies felt constrained to imitate their example.
‘Pour Out for the girls too,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘And do it properly. See that they
empty their cups first before you fill them.’
‘Yes, Grandma,’ said Bao-yu, and proceeded from table to table, pouring for
everyone in turn. When he got to Dai-yu he hesitated, knowing that for her this sort
of drinking was an impossibility; but Dai-yu held her cup up to his lips and he drained
its contents for her at a gulp.
‘Thank you,’ she said, smiling gratefully. Bao-yu refilled the winecup.
‘Don’t go drinking cold wine, Bao-yu,’ Xi-feng called out to him. ‘It’ll make your
hand shake. You won’t be able to write properly or draw a straight bow.’
‘I haven’t been drinking cold wine,’ said Bao-yu.
‘I know, I know,’ said Xi-feng gaily. ‘I was only joking.’
When Bao-yu had finished pouring out for all the girls -all, that is, except Jia Rong’s
wife Hu-shi, who, being of a generation below his, had to have her drink poured out
for her by a maid - he went onto the verandah outside and poured for Cousin Zhen
and the men. Having done so, he sat and chatted with them for a while before going
back into the hall and resuming his seat with the ladies.
Presently soup was served and, shortly after, little First Moon dumplings of
sweetened rice-flour. Grandmother Jia expressed concern for the boy-actors outside
in the cold:
‘Tell them to break off for a bit, poor little things! Let them have some hot soup and
some good hot food to eat before they go on again. They can have some of these
cakes and things, and some of these dumplings.’
A few minutes later, the stage in the courtyard having by now fallen silent, two blind
female ballad-singers, both of them familiar visitors to the house, were led in by the
women. A couple of high stools were placed behind them, on which Grandmother Jia
invited them to be seated, and their instruments were handed to them, a pipa lute
and a three-stringed ‘samisen’ guitar. Grandmother Jia asked Mrs Li and Aunt Xue
what story they would like to hear.
‘Anything,’ they said.
Grandmother Jia turned to the two women:
‘Have you added anything new to your repertoire lately?’
‘Yes,’ said one of the women. ‘We’ve got a new story set in the Five Dynasties
period, after the fall of Tang.’
‘What’s it called?’ Grandmother Jia asked her.
‘It’s called The Phoenix Seeks a Mate,’ said the woman.
‘Well, the name sounds all right,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Can you give us an idea
what it’s about, then we can decide whether we want to hear it or not?’
‘This story took place in the time of the Five Dynasties after the decline of the
Tang,’ said the woman. ‘There was in those days a certain gentleman called Wang
Zhong who, after having served as Chief Minister under two successive reigns, had
retired because of old age to live on his estate in the country. Now this Wang Zhong
had an only son whose name was Wang Xi-feng -’
This set everyone laughing.
‘Feng’s double, evidently,’ said Grandmother Jia.
One of the womenservants gave the blind ballad-singer a prod:
‘Don’t talk such nonsense! That’s our Mrs Lian’s name.’
‘Carry on, carry on!’ said Grandmother Jia.
The blind woman rose to her feet:
‘I’m dreadfully sorry, Mrs Lian. I had really no idea it was your name.’
‘Do carry on,’ said Xi-feng, laughing. ‘That’s quite all right. Coincidences over names
are the commonest thing in the world.’
The woman sat down again and continued:
‘A time came when this old Sir Wang sent his son off to the capital to sit for the
examinations. One day, while the young man was on his journey, there was a great
downpour of rain and he was forced to seek shelter in a near-by grange. Now it so
happened that the owner of this grange was a former acquaintance of old Sir Wang’s
called Li, and this old Sir Li invited the young man to spend a few days with him at the
grange, accommodating him in his own study. Sir Li had no son of his own, but he
had an only daughter called Chu?luan, a very accomplished young lady who excelled
in every?thing she turned her hand to, whether it was performing on the qin or
playing Go or painting or calligraphy -’
‘I can see why it’s called The Phoenix Seeks a Mate,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You
don’t need to tell me what the story’s about, I can guess already. “Feng” means
“phoenix” and “Chu-luan” means “little hen phoenix”. Obviously it’s the story of how
Wang Xi-feng seeks to make this Li Chu-luan his wife.’
‘I believe Your Old Ladyship has heard this story before,’ said the blind woman,
smiling.
‘Her Old Ladyship has heard everything,’ someone told her. ‘And what she hasn’t
heard she can guess.’
‘These stories are all the same,’ said Grandmother Jia,’ so tedious! Always the same
ideally eligible young bachelors and the same ideally beautiful and accomplished
young ladies -at least, they are supposed to be ideal, but there’s certainly nothing
ideal about their behaviour - in fact there’s nothing very ladylike about them at all.
Invariably, we are told how well-born they are. Their father has been a Prime Minister,
or a First Secretary at the very least. They are always their father’s only child and the
apple of his eye. They are always amazingly well-educated, a model of decorum, a
regular paragon of all the virtues - that is, until the first presentable young man
comes along. As soon as he appears on the scene -it doesn’t matter who or what he
is - all their book-learning and the duty they owe their parents fly out of the window
and the next moment they are “making their plans for the future” and generally
carrying on in a way that would bring blushes to the cheek of a cat-burglar - certainly
not in the least like respectable, educated young ladies. You would hardly call a young
woman who conducted herself like that a “paragon”, however many books she might
have read - any more than you would acquit a young fellow charged with highway
robbery on the grounds that he was a good scholar. The people who make up these
stories give themselves the lie every time they open their mouths.
‘And for another thing: if these young women really belonged to cultivated,
aristocratic households in which the girls and their mothers were all educated people,
then even allowing for the somewhat reduced circumstances owing to their father’s
early retirement, you can be sure there would still be plenty of nannies and maids in
attendance on them. So how is it that in all of these stories there is only ever a single
confidante who knows what her young mistress is getting up to? What are all the
other servants supposed to be doing all this time? Of course, this is only another
example of the way in which these stories contradict themselves.’
There was some laughter from the assembled company and someone complimented
Grandmother Jia on her perceptive?ness in exposing the underlying falseness of
these stories.
‘There’s always a reason for it,’ the old lady went on. ‘In some cases it’s because the
writer is envious of people so much better off than himself, or disappointed because
he has tried to obtain their patronage and failed, and deliberately portrays them in
this unfavourable light as a means of getting his own back on them. In other cases
the writers have been corrupted by reading this sort of stuff before they begin to
write any themselves, and, though totally ignorant of what life in educated,
aristocratic families is really like, portray their heroines in this way simply because
everyone else does so and they think it will please their readers. I ask you now, never
mind very grand families like the ones they pretend to be writing about, even in
average well-to-do families like ours when do you ever hear of such carryings-on? It’s
a wonder their jaws don’t drop off, telling such dreadful lies! For my part, I have
never allowed these sort of stories to be told. Even the maids here don’t know about
such matters. It’s true that during the past year or two, since I’ve been getting older,
and particularly now that the young people are most of the time safely out of the
way in the Garden, I do once in a while listen to a snatch or two of one of these
stories, when I feel in need of cheering up a bit; but as soon as the children arrive, I
make the person telling it stop.’
Mesdames Li and Xue were thoroughly in agreement:
‘That is the general rule in all the best people’s houses. Even in our households the
children aren’t allowed to listen to such stories.’
Xi-feng walked over to pour the old lady a drink:
‘Come on, Grannie, that’s enough! Your wine will be getting cold. Drink this first to
wet your whistle. You can go on with your lecture afterwards.’
She turned to the rest of the company:
‘The story you’ve just been listening to is called Falsehood Exposed, or The Tale of a
Grandmother. It is a story which took place under the reigning dynasty, on this very
day of this very month of this very year on this very spot and at this very hour. How
can Grannie “with one mouth tell a double tale”? Ah, how indeed! Our tale puts forth
two tails. Which tail to wag? Wig-wag. But for the time being we do not inquire
which tale is false, which true. Our story turns rather to those people in the party
who were admiring the lanterns and watching the play... Just give these two kinsfolk
a chance to drink a cup of wine and watch a scene or two more of the play, Grannie,
and then you can get on with your Exposure of Falsehood -dynasty by dynasty.’
She continued unconcernedly pouring wine while her audience convulsed
themselves. Even the blind ballad-singers were in stitches.
‘You’ve got the gift, Mrs Lian,’ they said. ‘It’s what we call a “hard mouth”. If you
were to take up story-telling as a profession, we should be out of business!’
‘Don’t let them encourage you,’ said Aunt Xue to Xi-feng, laughing. ‘You must
behave yourself. There are people outside listening. This isn’t like every day, you
know.’
‘It’s only Cousin Zhen outside there,’ said Xi-feng. ‘He and I used to get up to all
sorts of mischief together in our younger days. It’s only during the last few years
since I’ve grown up and married Lian that I’ve had to start being a bit more
strait-laced with him. But even though we have to treat each other like solemn
in-laws nowadays, I’m sure he doesn’t mind me fooling about like this. Think of Lao
Lai-zi in the Twenty-Four Patterns of Filial Piety, dressing up in children’s clothes at
the age of seventy and playing at “dicky-bird” in front of his aged parents to keep
them amused. If Cousin Zhen and the other menfolk won’t come in here and play
dicky-bird themselves, the fact that I’m taking so much trouble to make Grannie
laugh and get her to eat a bit should make them feel pleased and grateful, not critical
of my behaviour.’
‘It’s true, I haven’t had a really good laugh for days,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘She has
made me laugh so much, I really do feel better for it. I think I’ll have another drop of
wine.
She took a sip from her cup and then turned to address
Bao-yu: ‘Pour a cup for your Cousin Feng.’
‘No need,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Let me share your good health.’ She took the cup that
Grandmother Jia had just been drink?ing from and tossed back what remained of the
wine in it, then, handing the cup to a maid to take away, she replaced it with a clean
one that had been previously warmed in hot water. She then proceeded to do the
same for everyone else, removing their dirty cups and replacing them with clean,
warmed ones. After that she poured out a fresh supply of wine for everyone before
returning to her seat.
‘If Your Old Ladyship doesn’t want to hear a story,’ said the blind woman who had
spoken before, ‘perhaps you’d like us to do a song for you.’
‘Give us “O Captain, Captain”,’ said Grandmother Jia.
The two women at once began tuning their instruments and presently struck up a
lively tune, the words of which were divided alternately between them.
Grandmother Jia inquired what the time was.
‘Midnight,’ said one of the senior womenservants.
‘No wonder it’s getting so cold,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It really is bitter.’
Maids were already arriving with more clothes, which they helped their mistresses to
change into or put on over what they were already wearing.
Lady Wang rose, smiling, to her feet:
‘Why don’t you go into the room at the back, Mother, where the heated kang is?
Mrs Li and my sister are not outsiders; I’m sure they won’t mind. And the rest of us
will take care of them for you.’
‘Why don’t we all go inside?’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘That will be much cosier.’
‘I doubt there’s room for us all,’ said Lady Wang.
‘I’ll tell you what,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘We don’t need all these tables now. Why
don’t we have just two or three of them taken inside? We can have them put
together to make one big table, then we can all squeeze up round it and keep each
other warm. That will be much jollier!’
Everyone agreed that this was a good idea and got up from their places in
preparation for the move. The tables were cleared, the three largest ones were
carried into the inner room and put together, and the dessert, with various additions
and replacements, was relaid on them inside.
‘Now,’ said Grandmother Jia when everybody was inside, ‘you must forget about
seniority now and sit down where I put you.’
She made Mrs Li and Mrs Xue sit at one end, facing south, and placed herself close to
them on the east side, with Xiang?yun squeezed in on one side of her and Dai-yu and
Bao-qin on the other.
‘You must sit next to your mother,’ she told Bao-yu. So Lady Xing and Lady Wang
came next on the east side with Bao-yu sandwiched between them.
She put Bao-chai on the west side at the end nearest to Mrs Li, then came the Three
Springs, then Lou-shi with her little boy Jia Jun, then Li Wan and You-shi with little Jia
Lan squeezed in between them, and finally Xi-feng.
Jia Rong’s wife, Hu-shi, sat on her own at the north end, round the corner from
Xi-feng.
When they were all seated, Grandmother Jia called to Cousin Zhen and the menfolk
to leave, saying that she herself would shortly be going off to bed. Hearing her call,
Cousin Zhen came hurrying inside, bringing the others with him.
‘Go away, go away!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Don’t come in here! They’ve only just
sat down, they don’t want to have to all get up again. Off to bed with you! You’ve got
important things to do in the morning.’
‘Very good,’ said Cousin Zhen. ‘I’ll leave Rong behind then, to pour the drinks for
you.’
‘Ah yes,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’d forgotten him.’
Cousin Zhen and Jia Lian withdrew. Pleased to be so soon released, they arranged for
Jia Cong and Jia Huan to be escorted back to their own apartments and went off, as
they had planned to do if possible, to spend the rest of the night together on the
town. But that is no part of our story.
‘I was just thinking,’ said Grandmother Jia when they had gone, ‘ all these people
enjoying themselves here tonight: all we lacked was a young married couple to make
it seem like a proper reunion. I was forgetting about Rong. Sit next to your wife, Rong.
Let’s see you both together.’
Just then some of the women came in bringing a playbill with them. The players were
preparing to resume.
‘Oh, just as we were beginning to enjoy a little conversation,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘Now we shan’t be able to hear ourselves speak. And those poor children must be
getting dreadfully cold after so many hours in the open. Why don’t we give them a
rest? Call our own troupe over and let them do something on this stage. The other
ones can stay here and watch them.’
With answering cries the women went out to make the necessary arrangements.
Messengers were sent, some into Prospect Garden to summon the young actresses,
others to the inner gate to requisition some pages. When the pages presented
themselves at the green-room door they were told to take away all the grown-up
members of the visiting troupe and entertain them elsewhere so that only the
boy-actors should be present when the little actresses arrived. These last were to be
observed shortly afterwards, issuing from the gallery at the corner entrance to the
courtyard, preceded by their chief singing instructor and accompanied by a number
of women carrying bundles. There had not been time to bring the wardrobe-boxes,
so they had had to make a guess at the three or four plays that Grandmother Jia was
likeliest to want to hear and hurriedly bundle together the costumes that would be
needed for their performance.
Led by the women who had summoned them, Elegante and the rest entered the
heated back room of the hall, made their curtsies to Grandmother Jia and the rest of
the company, and then stood, arms held stiffly at their sides, awaiting instructions.
Grandmother Jia smiled at them benevolently:
‘Doesn’t your teacher give you a holiday even for First Moon? Dear, dear, dear! -
Well now, what are you going to sing for us? We’ve just been listening to The
Orphan’s Revenge which was so noisy that it’s given us all headaches. We’d like to
hear something a bit quieter now. I ought to tell you that we have a very
discriminating audience here tonight. There’s Mrs Xue and Mrs Li here who both
come from families which used to keep their own troupes of players and who have
heard heaven knows how many good performances between them; there are some
young ladies here who know much more than our own girls about plays and music;
and the troupe you saw just now outside, though they are only children, belong to a
famous conn9isseur and are better than many commercial companies of grown-up
players. So if we don’t want to disgrace ourselves, we shall have to be on our best.
Now let’s see. Let’s try to think of something a bit different to show them. Suppose
we get Parfumee to sing “The Dream Recalled” from The Return of the Soul with just
a fiddle to accompany her - leaving out all the woodwind. How would that be for a
start?’
‘Just the thing, Your Old Ladyship,’ said Elegante drily. We’re certainly not good
enough for Mrs Xue and Mrs Li to want to see us in full performance. They just want
an idea of what our diction and voice-production are like.’
‘Quite so,’ said Grandmother Jia.
The two ladies referred to were much diverted by Elegante’s reply.
‘I believe you and Her Old Ladyship are pulling our legs,’ they told her.
‘Not at all,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘These girls are trained only for our own private
amusement, not as an investment. We don’t hire them out, like some people. So
they really aren’t up to commercial standards.’
She turned to Althee, the performer of ‘painted face’ parts:
‘You can do “Hui-ming Takes the Letter” from The Western Chamber. Don’t bother
to make up for it, though. I think those two scenes should be enough to give our
guests some idea of what you can do. Put all you’ve got into it, now, or I shall have
something to say to you!’
The little actresses went out. Those who were to play had soon got into their
costumes and the performance began:
first ‘The Dream Recalled’ and then ‘Taking the Letter’. The audience listened
throughout with rapt attention. When the performance had ended, Aunt Xue
observed that, though she had seen hundreds of different companies in her time, she
had never before heard a performance in which the woodwind in the orchestra was
silent.
‘Oh yes,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Take that “Chu River” aria the heroine sings in The
House in Ping-kang Lane that we were listening to earlier in the evening. Quite often
you can see productions which leave out the woodwind parts in the orchestral
accompaniment. Instead they have the male lead playing a flute accompaniment on
the stage. I agree, a whole sequence with only string accompaniment is unusual, but
there’s nothing very special about it. It depends entirely on the individual preference
of the person who owns the troupe.’
She pointed to Xiang-yun:
‘When I was this child’s age her grandfather had a troupe of young actresses one of
whom was a very good qin-player. She took a number of qin-playing scenes like the
famous one from The Western Chamber and the scene in which Miao-chang plays
the qin in The Jade Hairpin and the “Eighteen Stanzas for the Barbarian Pipe” from
the modern sequel to The Story of the Lute, and arranged them in a single sequence
with qin accompaniment. That was rather impressive. More what-shall-I-say than the
things we have just been listening to.
‘Yes,’ the others agreed, ‘that does sound most unusual.’
Grandmother Jia called the women over and told them that she would now like
Elegante and the others to perform an instrumental piece called Lantern Festival
Moon. The women went out again to transmit her order. Meanwhile Jia Rong and his
wife went round replenishing the winecups.
Xi-feng observed that Grandmother Jia was in very good spirits.
‘While the ballad-singers are still here,’ she said, ‘why don’t we get them to play
“Spring Joy on Every Brow” for us and we can have a game of “Pass the Plum”?’
‘Oh yes, that’s a good game,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Just right for this time of year,
too.’
Orders were given for a pair of drums to be fetched - special ‘drinker’s drums’ whose
black lacquered sides were studded with patterns of brass nails - and handed to the
blind women. Someone produced a flowering spray of red plum for the game.
‘Now,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘whoever’s hand the branch is in when the drumming
stops must first drink a cup of wine and then they have to say something: but what
shall it be?’
‘You can turn your hand to anything, Grannie,’ said Xi-feng, ‘but for those of us who
aren’t so clever it won’t be much fun if it’s something that we’re no good at. I think it
should be something that all of us can enjoy. Why not say that whoever the branch
stops with must tell a joke?’
Everyone present knew that Xi-feng was a wonderful raconteuse with a seemingly
inexhaustible stock of new and funny stories. The servants standing below in
attendance seemed quite as much delighted by this proposal as the members of the
family sitting around the table on the kang, and several little maids went racing off to
inform sisters or cousins outside:
‘Quick, come inside! Mrs Lian is going to tell a joke.’
In no time at all the room was packed with maids.
The actresses had by now finished playing. Grandmother Jia, after first seeing to it
that they were given some soup and a selection of the delicacies available, gave
orders for the drumming to begin.
The blind women were practised performers in this game and deliberately varied the
speed of the beat. Sometimes it would be as slow as the last drips of a water-clock,
sometimes as fast as the rattle of dried beans poured from a bag, sometimes it would
go galloping along like a runaway horse, sometimes it became a soft whisper
interspersed with sudden bursts of sound to make you jump, like flashes of lightning
in the darkness. When the beat was slow, the branch passed slowly from hand to
hand; when it was hurried, the passing too grew faster. Then suddenly it stopped
altogether while Grandmother Jia was holding it. This, in itself, was enough to make
everyone laugh. Jia Rong quickly came round and filled up the old lady’s winecup.
‘Naturally Grandma is the lucky first,’ the others said. ‘You must let us share your
luck, Grandma!’
‘The wine is no problem,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It’s the joke that’s worrying me.’
‘Come now, your jokes are better even than Feng’s, Grandma,’ they said. ‘Do tell us
one. Make us all laugh.’
‘I don’t know any good new ones,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘I’ll just have to put a bold
face on it and do the best I can.’
She began her story.
‘In a certain family there were ten sons, all of whom were married, but of the girls
they married only one, the youngest, was intelligent and nimble-witted and a good
talker. The old couple doted on this clever daughter-in-law and day in day out found
fault with the other nine. The other nine naturally resented this and took counsel
together what they should do about it.
“‘At heart we are every bit as dutiful as she is,” they said, “but because the little
wretch is so glib, father-in-law and mother-in-law only care for her. Isn’t there
anything we can do about this injustice?”
‘Then one of the nine had an idea:
“‘Why don’t we go to the temple of Yama, the King of the Underworld, and ask him
why, when our souls first went into human bodies, he gave that little horror a clever
tongue and made all the rest of us so stupid?”
‘The others were delighted with this suggestion, and so next day they all went
trooping off to the temple of King Yama and, after offering up incense, lay down on
the steps of the altar and went to sleep. When they were asleep, the souls of the
nine sisters-in-law waited and waited and waited, but King Yama didn’t come.
‘Presently, just as they were growing desperate, Monkey came bowling along on his
cloud-trapeze, and seeing the nine souls there, lifted up his metal-clasped cudgel to
strike them with. The souls knelt down in terror and begged him to spare them.
Monkey asked them what they were doing there, so they told him their story. When
they had finished, Monkey stamped his foot and sighed sympathetically.
“‘What a good job you met me here and not old Yama,” he said. “He wouldn’t have
been able to help you at all.”
‘The nine souls implored him to tell them what they should do.
“‘Do but have compassion on us, Great Sage,” they said, “and our troubles will be
over.”
“‘It’s quite simple,” said Monkey with a laugh. “The day that the ten of you were
due to enter your human bodies, I happened to have been around at old Yama’s
place and done a little piddle on the floor, and just before she was born, that little
sister-in-law of yours drank it all up. That’s what gave her such a clever tongue. If
clever tongues are all you want, I can do as much piddle for you as you like.”‘
The story ended amidst laughter.
‘It’s a good job all of us are such stupid, tongue-tied creatures,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I
should hate to think that any of us had drunk monkey’s piddle!’
You-shi and Lou-shi turned towards Li Wan, laughing:
‘I wonder who she thinks she’s fooling. It’s very clear which of us in this room is the
one who drank monkey’s piddle!’
‘A joke is always the better for being apt,’ Aunt Xue observed.
While she was speaking, the drumming began again. The maids, who wanted only to
hear Wang Xi-feng tell a joke, had come to a secret understanding with the blind
women that if one of them coughed it would be a signal to stop, and when the
branch had been round twice and had just reached Xi-feng for the second time, the
maids all coughed and the drumming stopped. There was a shout of laughter from all
present.
‘Ha!’ they said. ‘Now we’ve got you! Hurry up with your wine and tell us a good
one - only don’t make us laugh so much that we get stomach-ache!’
Xi-feng thought for a few moments and then started:
‘A family was celebrating the First Moon festival, just as we are doing, admiring the
lanterns and drinking wine together. It was a very lively party and everyone in the
family was there: the grandmother, the great-grandmother, the daughters-in-law, the
granddaughters-in-law, the great?granddaughters-in-law, the grandsons, the
great-nephews,      the    great-grandsons,    the   great-great-grandsons,     the
great-little-medium-grandsons, the granddaughters, the great-nieces, the first
cousins once removed, the first cousins twice removed, the second cousins
two-and-a-half times removed - oh, good?ness gracious me, it was a really lively
party!’
Her audience were already laughing.
‘She’s a caution!’ they said. ‘I wonder which of us she’s got it in for this time.’
‘Don’t you bring me into it,’ said You-shi, laughing: ‘I’ll tear your mouth for you!’
Xi-feng stood up and struck her hands together in mock despair:
‘Here am I going to all this trouble to entertain you and all you do is keep
interrupting. All right then, I won’t go on.’
‘Go on, go on! Take no notice of them!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘What happened
then?’
‘What happened then?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Oh, there they all sat, and after drinking
together all night long, they went to bed.’
She said this straight-faced and in a very matter-of-fact tone of voice. Her audience
waited open-mouthed for her to con?tinue, but nothing was forthcoming, and at last
they realized, with a chill of disappointment, that that was all they were going to hear.
After a long, old-fashioned look from Shi Xiang-yun she relented, however.
‘All right, let me tell you another story about people celebrating the First Moon
festival.
‘Some men were taking an enormous rocket outside the city and a crowd of
thousands had collected behind them to see them let it off. While they were still on
their way, some impatient character who couldn’t bear to wait any longer put a
lighted incense-stick to the touch-paper and lit the fuse. There was a great WHOOSH!
and the rocket went off. Every?one burst out laughing and went off home - all except
the man who had been underneath, carrying the rocket on his back. He just stood
there all on his own, complaining what a rotten job the firework-maker had made of
the rocket. He’d put it together so badly, he said, that all the gunpowder had trickled
away before they’d had a chance to let it off.’
‘But surely he’d have heard it go off?’ said Xiang-yun.
‘He was stone deaf,’ said Xi-feng.
There was a burst of laughter from her audience. But they were still worried about
her earlier story.
‘What about the other one you were telling? What did happen then? You really
ought to finish it, you know.’
‘Oh how you do pester one!’ said Xi-feng, thumping the table in pretended
annoyance. ‘Next day was the sixteenth; the party was over; the festival had ended. If
you ask me, I think they were too busy clearing up and putting things away to know
what had happened then.’
This brought another burst of laughter.
‘That’s two o’clock sounding outside,’ said Xi-feng. ‘I’m sure Grannie must be tired.
If you ask me, I think we all ought to be like the deaf man’s firework and “trickle away
You-shi, who in the vehemence of her mirth was rocking back and forth with a
handkerchief stuffed in her mouth, stopped for a moment to point a minatory finger
at Xi-feng:
‘She really is a caution, this one!’
‘She’s a caution all right, and no mistake!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘By the way,
talking of fireworks, why don’t we let ours off now? They will help us to overcome
the effects of all that wine.’
At once Jia Rong jumped up and hurried out. Under his supervision a team of pages
set up a number of framework stands in the courtyard on which fireworks were then
fastened or hung. Though none of them particularly large ones, they were all
imported tribute fireworks of the very highest quality. There were fireworks of all
sorts, including a number of bangers. Dai-yu, being of a nervous disposition, was
terrified of pops and bangs. Knowing this, Grandmother Jia hugged her to her bosom
to comfort her. Aunt Xue offered the same protection to Xiang-yun, but Xiang-yun
laughed and said that she didn’t mind the fireworks.
‘There’s nothing she likes better than letting them off herself,’ said Bao-chai. ‘She’s
not afraid of fireworks!’
Lady Wang hugged Bao-yu.
‘What about me?’ said Xi-feng. ‘Doesn’t anyone love me?’
‘I’ll hold you,’ said You-shi, laughing, ‘ though why you should act the shrinking
young thing now I can’t imagine. Normally when you hear fireworks you get so
excited I’d sooner eat a bee’s turd than stand by and watch you!’
‘Wait until this is over,’ said Xi-feng. ‘We’ll go out in the courtyard and let some off
ourselves. I’m sure I can do it better than these boys.’
While they were speaking, a succession of different sorts of fireworks were going off
outside: golden rain, ‘nine dragon’ rockets, thunderflashes, cloud-hoppers, and many
other sorts. When the display was over, the boy-actors were asked to go up on the
stage again and play the Beggar’s Song, and every?one amused themselves by
throwing money onto the stage and watching them scramble for it.
As hot soup was once more being served, Grandmother Jia remarked that after being
up for so many hours she was beginning to feel rather empty.
‘We have some duck and rice stew ready,’ Xi-feng told her.
‘I think I’d like something a bit lighter than that,’ said Grandmother Jia.
‘We’ve got a rice and date frumenty that was made for the ladies who don’t eat
meat,’ said Xi-feng.
‘That will do,’ said Grandmother Jia.
The used things were removed now from the table and another set of dishes
containing all sorts of tempting entremets laid out in their place. When everyone had
sampled what they fancied, they rinsed their mouths out with tea supplied for that
purpose and the party finally broke up.

*

Early on the morning of the seventeenth the family paid a formal visit to the
Ning-guo mansion to attend the ceremonial closing of the Hall of Ancestors and the
taking down and putting away of the ancestral portraits. Later in that day, when they
were back at Rong-guo House, they attended a New Year reception by Aunt Xue.
There was no question of another Visitation that year. A Dowager Consort, who had
been the late Emperor’s favourite concubine, had fallen seriously ill and the filial
feelings of the reigning Emperor had prompted him to curtail all seasonal festivities
at the Palace. So from Yuan-chun that year there was not so much as a lantern riddle.
There was, however, during the days which followed, a succession of parties or
‘receptions’ given by the senior domestics of the household, to which the family
were, of course, invited: Lai Da’s on the eighteenth, Lai Sheng’s at the Ning-guo
mansion on the nineteenth, Lin Zhi-xiao’s on the twentieth, Widow Shan’s on the
twenty-first and Wu Xin?deng’s on the twenty-second. Grandmother Jia attended
these or not as the fancy took her, sometimes coming at the beginning and staying
until all the other guests had gone, sometimes only putting in a brief appearance
long after her arrival had been despaired of. But she refused absolutely to turn up
when friends or relations were visiting, or to attend the receptions to which they
invited her, leaving Lady Xing, Lady Wang and Xi-feng to stand in for her on these
occasions. Bao-yu, too - apart from a single duty visit to his uncle Wang Zi-teng’s
house - managed to avoid all social gather?ings by saying that his grandmother
needed him at home to keep her amused.
Then suddenly, when all the festivities were over, an event occurred which filled the
whole household with dismay. Xi-feng had a miscarriage.
For further information on this subject you must turn to the following chapter.

CHAPTER 55

A foolish concubine seeks to humiliate her own daughter
And an ill-natured stewardess tries to outwit
Her young mistress



As we were saying, the First Month festivities in the Rong?guo mansion were scarcely
over when Xi-feng had a miscarriage. Confined for a month to her room by doctor’s
orders and with two or three physicians in daily attendance on her, she was unable to
keep up her usual management of the household’s affairs; yet so confident was she
of her powers of recovery that she continued, in spite of remonstrances, to plan
things from her sick-room, despatching Patience with messages to Lady Wang
whenever she thought of something that needed doing.
Lady Wang for her part was like a woman who has lost a limb. Never at the best of
times an energetic person, she attended to only the most important matters herself
and left most of the routine business to Li Wan. Unfortunately Li Wan, though a
model young woman in some respects, was not a good manager and allowed the
servants to do more or less as they liked. Soon Lady Wang was obliged to call in
Tan-chun as a reinforcement. It would only be for a month, she told them. If they
could bold out for a month, Xi-feng would by then be better and would be able to
take over once more.
But Xi-feng was not as robust as she supposed. Like many young people she had not
been taking proper care of herself, and the excessive demands she had for some time
past been making on her nervous energies had seriously weakened a constitution
that was already far from strong. The miscarriage was in fact only a symptom of her
body’s exhaustion. A month later it was followed by the beginning of a chronic small
dis?charge of blood from the womb. Although she was unwilling to tell anyone about
it, it was apparent to everyone from her gaunt and yellow look that something must
be seriously the matter with her.
Lady Wang insisted that she should make a more serious effort to get better: she
must follow the treatment prescribed for her; above all she must stop worrying
about the household. Xi-feng was herself beginning to be afraid that the trouble
might develop into a major illness which would leave her at the mercy of her
enemies and was now willing to take time off to recuperate. But in spite of her
impatience to get better, the weakness was not to be cured in a day, and it was not
until well into the autumn of that year, after months of slow con?valescence, that her
body recovered its strength and the dis?charge of blood finally dried up.
But we anticipate. Let us return to the time about a month after the miscarriage
when Lady Wang was beginning to realize that her niece was far from better and
could not be expected to relieve Li Wan and Tan-chun of their duties.
Lady Wang was worried about the Garden. There were far too many people in it: she
feared that they were receiving insufficient supervision. Calling Bao-chai to her, she
entrusted her with their surveillance.
‘Those older women are no good,” she told her. ‘They drink and play cards
whenever they have a moment to spare. They sleep in the daytime and play cards at
night, I know they do. When Feng was up and about, there was someone they were
afraid of; but now that she is out of the way, I expect they do just as they please.
Now my dear, I know you are a dependable person. Your cousins are too young for
these matters and I am too busy. Will you please, for my sake, keep your eye on
things for the next week or two? If you come across anything I have missed, point it
out to me. I don’t want Lady Jia asking me about things and finding that I don’t know
the answer. If you see any of the servants misbehaving, let me know. And report
them if they are disobedient. Don’t wait for things to get out of hand before speaking
up about them.’
Bao-chai, whatever she thought of this request, could not very well refuse it.
Spring was now at its height. Dai-yu’s seasonal cough had returned, and in All-spice
Court Shi Xiang-yun lay ill in bed with some epidemic sickness that required constant
medical attention. Li Wan and Tan-chun, though neighbours, were too far apart for
their present circumstances, since servants had to keep going from one place to the
other looking for them, so it was decided that for purposes of household
management they should meet at six o’clock each morning in a little three-frame
reception room on the south side of the Garden gate. They would eat their lunch
there and would be available for seeing people on household business there up to
the end of the morning.
This reception room had originally been intended as a place for the senior eunuchs to
sit at the time of the Visitation. After the Visitation was over there was no further
use for it -in the daytime, at any rate; at night it provided a convenient meeting-place
for the women who made up the watch. Now that the weather was getting warmer,
it did not need a great deal doing to it - beyond moving in one or two pieces of
furniture - to turn it into a comfortable office for the young managers. It had a board
over the doorway bearing the in?scription

SUPPORT BENEVOLENCE PROMOTE VIRTUE

but the servants always referred to it simply as ‘the jobs room’.
Thither, then, at six o’clock each morning the two sisters?-in-law repaired and sat
there until noon while a stream of stewardesses and serving women trooped in and
out reporting on their duties and asking for their instructions.
To begin with, when the servants heard that Li Wan would be managing the
household on her own, all of them were secretly pleased. She was known to be a
kind, easy-going sort of person who disliked giving punishments, and with her in
command they felt sure that it would be much easier than usual to get away with
things. Even the addition of Tan-chun did not materially alter these expectations.
Tan-chun was young and unmarried and, so far as one could judge, a quiet and docile
girl. They foresaw no trouble from that quarter and were, as a consequence, inclined
to take liberties in her presence that they would not have dared to do with Xi-feng.
Within only a few days of her arrival, however, they had begun to sense, from the
way in which she handled one or two of the matters that were brought to her
attention, that though quieter-spoken than Xi-feng and of a much more equable
disposition, she yielded nothing to her in thoroughness.
By coincidence it happened that about this time a dozen or more important events -
promotions, demotions, marriages, deaths and the like - occurred in rapid succession
among the group of aristocratic and official families connected by matrimonial or
other ties with the Ning-guo and Rong-guo Jias, and for days on end Lady Wang’s
time was taken up with visits of condolence or felicitation. Some responsible person
was needed to stand in for her while she was away; so while Li Wan and Tan-chun
spent all their mornings in the office, Bao-chai spent hers in Lady Wang’s apartment,
only leaving it when her aunt got home from her visiting. At night the three young
guardians spent whatever time could be spared from their sewing patrolling the
Garden in sedans, escorted by the old women of the watch. Working together in this
way they soon came to feel that they had evolved a system of supervision more
careful even than Xi-feng’s - a view amply borne out by the grumbles of the
domestics themselves:
‘No sooner is the Terror of the Seas put out of action than along come these three
Scourges of the Mountains to take her place. Nowadays you can’t even take time off
for a quiet drink of a night or a little game of cards!’
A day came when Lady Wang was due to attend a luncheon at the Marquis of
Jin-xiang’s. Li Wan and Tan-chun, after an early toilet, had attended her to the gate
and seen her off. They had just got back to their office and were enjoying a morning
cup of tea when Wu Xin-deng’s wife came in to report:
‘Mrs Zhao’s brother, Zhao Guo-ji, died yesterday. I told Her Ladyship and she said I
was to report it to you.
Having delivered this brief communiqué’, she stood in silence, her arms held stiffly at
her sides, waiting for a reply. A number of stewardesses who were waiting their turn
to report, pricked up their ears at this mention of Tan-chun’s natural mother and
waited with interest to see what the two young deputies would decide. If their
decision was a good one, they would in future treat them with respect; but if it was
one in which there was the slightest possibility of picking holes, not only would they
not respect them, but afterwards, when they got back outside, they would have
many a good laugh at their expense.
The behaviour of Wu Xin-deng’s wife on this occasion was quite deliberate. If it had
been Xi-feng that she was reporting to, she would have demonstrated her efficiency
by making one or two helpful suggestions, having armed herself beforehand with
some precedents for Xi-feng to choose from; but as it was only Li Wan and Tan-chun,
one of whom she despised for her softness and the other for her youth, she merely
stated her business and left them to flounder unaided.
Tan-chun turned questioningly to Li Wan.
‘When Aroma’s mother died recently, didn’t they give her forty taels?’ said Li Wan
after thinking for a bit. ‘I suppose we’d better give her forty taels.’
‘Yes ma’am,’ said Wu Xin-deng’s wife, and taking up a tally, went hurrying off to
collect the money.
‘Just a minute!’ Tan-chun called out after her.
Wu xinLdeng’s wife returned - a trifle reluctantly it could be observed.
‘Don’t collect that money yet,’ said Tan-chun. ‘There’s something I want to ask you.
Of the old women in Lady Jia’s apartment who used to be chamber-wives when my
grandfather was alive, some must have been home-reared and some must have been
bought outside. There’s a different scale for the two kinds, isn’t there? How much do
the home-reared ones get when someone in their family dies and how much do the
ones from outside get? Give us one or two examples so that we have something to
go on.’
Not having prepared herself for such a question, Wu Xin?deng’s wife was unable to
answer it. She covered up for herself, all smiles:
‘It’s not a very important matter. Just give what you think. No one’s going to
question your decision.’
Tan-chun smiled back:
‘Now you are talking nonsense. Suppose I said, “Give her a hundred taels”? No, we
have to give what is right: otherwise, quite apart from the fact that you will all laugh
at us, how am I going to face Mrs Lian when I next see her?’
‘Very good then, I’ll go and look up the old accounts,’ said Wu Xin-deng’s wife. ‘I
can’t at the moment remember.’
‘You’ve been working here all these years and you can’t remember?’ said Tan-chun.
‘I think you are trying to make things difficult for us. I can’t believe that you have to
go off and look things up when Mrs Lian asks you a question. If you do, all I can say
is that she is not such a strict mistress as she is supposed to be: in fact, I should say
that she was a rather indulgent one. All right, hurry up and fetch the accounts then!
If this matter is delayed, it isn’t your negligence that will be blamed but our
incompetence.’
Blushing to the roots of her hair, Wu Xin-deng’s wife hurried off to do as she was
bidden. The other women gasped and stuck their tongues out in surprise. Reporting
on other matters continued in her absence.
After a little while she returned with the account-books. On examination Tan-chun
found two instances of home-reared concubines receiving twenty taels and two of
‘outsiders’ receiving forty taels. She also found an instance of an outsider receiving a
hundred taels and one of an outsider receiving sixty; but in each case a note
explaining special circumstances had been made against the entry: in the first case
the body of a parent had had to be conveyed in its coffin for interment in another
province and the extra sixty taels was to cover the cost of transport; in the second
case the extra twenty taels was for the purchase of a plot of ground for burial.
Tan-chun handed Li Wan the relevant account to look at, while at the same time
informing Wu Xin-deng’s wife of her decision:
‘Give her twenty taels. And leave these accounts with us, so that we can have a
good look at them.’
Wu Xin-deng’s wife went off once more.
The next thing that happened was that Aunt Zhao came stalking in. Li Wan and
Tan-chun invited her to be seated, but Aunt Zhao was in no mood for polite
preliminaries.
‘Everyone in this family tramples on me,’ she said, address?ing herself to Tan-chun.
‘Don’t you think that you at least might stick up for me?’
She began crying messily, the abundant moisture seeming to come as much from her
nostrils as from her eyes.
‘Who are you complaining about?’ said Tan-chun. ‘I really don’t understand you.
Who’s been trampling on you? If you would tell me, perhaps I might be able to “stick
up” for you.’
‘You have, for a start,’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘That doesn’t leave me anyone to turn to,
does it?’
Tan-chun leaped to her feet:
‘I shouldn’t dream of trampling on you.’
Li Wan, too, stood up and made some soothing remark or other. But Aunt Zhao was
not to be placated:
‘Sit down both of you, and listen to me. I’ve given the best years of my life to this
family - years and years and years. I’ve borne two children for them, you and your
brother. And now, after all that, I’m not even to be treated as well as Aroma. What
sort of face does that leave me with? What sort of face does it leave you with - never
mind me?’
Tan-chun laughed mirthlessly:
‘Oh that’s what this is about! The simple answer to that is that I have to follow the
rules.’
She sat down again, opened up the account-book and, holding it out for Aunt Zhao to
see, read the relevant entries out to her.
‘These regulations were laid down by the ancestors for everyone to follow. I can’t
suddenly go altering them. It isn’t just Aroma. It will be exactly the same if one day
Huan has a chamber-wife from outside. If someone in her family dies, then, as an
outsider, she will get exactly the same amount as Aroma did. It has nothing to do
with who is more important than whom. It isn’t a matter of prestige at all. Zhao
Guo-ji was Lady Wang’s bondservant. That means that he belongs to the
“home-reared” class. The rules lay down a certain scale of payments for that class.
All I have done is to follow the rules. I am sure that Zhao Guo-ji must approve and be
grateful to the ancestors and Lady Wang for their generosity. If he doesn’t - if he
thinks he is being unfairly treated - then all I can say is that he is stupid and
ungrateful and one can’t really care very much what he thinks. As regards face, it
makes no difference to me whether Lady Wang gives him everything she’s got or
nothing at all. And I really do think that while she is away you might try to compose
yourself a bit and not go working yourself up into such a state. Although Lady Wang
is so good to me, I am constantly worried that you will spoil everything with your
perpetual trouble-making. If I’d been a boy I should have left home long ago and
done some?thing to show myself worthy of her kindness; but as I am a girl, I have to
stay at home and never say a word out of turn. I believe she realizes this, and
because she thinks highly of me she has entrusted me with this managing job as a
means of proving myself. But before I have had a chance to do anything, you have to
come along and start making things diffi?cult for me. If Lady Wang gets to hear of it,
she will probably conclude that the job is too hard for me and take it away again.
That would be a real loss of face - for you as well as for me.’
Tan-chun’s shoulders began to shake as she said this and she ended up by bursting
into tears.
Aunt Zhao did not really have an answer to what Tan-chun had said, so she tried
another tack.
‘If Lady Wang is so fond of you, you ought to use your position to give us a helping
hand. The fact is, though, you are so anxious to keep in her good books that you
forget about us altogether.’
‘Of course I don’t forget about you,’ said Tan-chun. ‘But what do you mean by
giving you a “helping hand”? A good mistress will always be favourable to those who
try hard and make themselves useful, and a good servant doesn’t need any “helping
hand” in order to keep in her favour.’
Li Wan hovered between them, still trying to act the peace maker:
‘Please don’t be angry, Mrs Zhao. You mustn’t blame Tan?chun. I’m sure she’s most
anxious to give you all the help she can; but you could hardly expect her to say so.’
‘Don’t talk such stuff, Wan!’ said Tan-chun impatiently. ‘Help whom, for goodness
sake? Whoever heard of the young mistress in a family helping the servants? Their
private interests are no concern of mine, as you perfectly well know.’
‘We’re not talking about “servants”, we’re talking about me,’ said Aunt Zhao angrily.
‘If you hadn’t been in charge now, I’d never have asked you. At this particular
moment you happen to be in charge here. Very well. Your mother’s brother has just
died. If you decide to give an extra twenty or thirty taels towards his funeral, Her
Ladyship isn’t going to stop you, is she? Of course she isn’t. We all know what a good,
kind person Her Ladyship is. It’s mean, tight-fisted people like you interfering that
stop her being generous. I simply don’t know what you’re worried about. It isn’t your
money you’re spending. I’d been hoping that one of these days when you grew up
and got married you’d be able to do our Zhao family a bit of good. But not you!
You’re in such a hurry to find a higher branch to perch on, you’ve forgotten the nest
even before your feathers are full-grown!’
Tan-chun went white, and for a moment anger deprived her of her breath. When she
regained it she broke into louder sobs.
‘Who is this “mother’s brother”? The only mother’s brother I know about is the
one who has just been appointed Inspector-General of Armies in the Nine Provinces.
I’m sure I always try to show respect where it is due, but no one ever told me that I
ought to think of Zhao Guo-ji as my uncle. If so, how is it that he always stood up for
Huan and walked behind him on his way to school in the mornings? Why didn’t he
insist on being treated as an uncle by Huan? But what’s the point? Everyone knows it
was you who bore me. Two or three months never go by without your making a
scene about something or other just to give yourself an opportunity of proclaiming
the fact. And you talk about face! It’s a good job I understand your little game. If I
were a simple-minded person and not very sure of my position, it would have driven
me distracted long ago.’
The ever more agitated attempts at peace-making by Li Wan and continuing gabble
of complaint from Aunt Zhao which followed this outburst were suddenly interrupted
by a call from the women outside:
‘Here’s Miss Patience with a message from Mrs Lian.’
At once Aunt Zhao fell silent. She advanced fawningly on Patience as she entered:
‘Is your mistress any better, Patience? I’ve been meaning to go round and see her,
but I just haven’t had the time.’
Li Wan asked Patience what she had come for.
‘Mrs Lian heard that Mrs Zhao’s brother had died and she was afraid you might not
know what to give. She said according to the rule it should be twenty taels, but in
this particular case Miss Tan should feel free to add on a bit if she sees fit.’
‘Oh? On what grounds, I wonder?’ said Tan-chun, who had by this time wiped the
traces of tears from her face. ‘I’m not aware that there was anything very special
about this person. His mother didn’t carry him for twenty-four months before he was
born. He didn’t rescue his master on the battle?field from under a heap of corpses
and carry him to safety on his back. It is very ingenious of your mistress, getting me
to break the rules so that she can take the credit for being generous, but if she
wishes to play the Lady Bountiful by giving away other people’s money, I’m afraid she
will have to wait. Tell her that I absolutely refuse to take responsibility for any change
in the rules. If she wants to make a change, let her wait until she is better. Then she
can add on as much as she likes!’
Patience had already had a rough idea of the situation when she arrived and by the
time Tan-chun finished speaking she had sized it up completely. Observing the anger
in Tan-chun’s face, she did not presume to reply in the joking, light-hearted manner
she would normally have adopted with her, but stood in silence, with her arms held
submissively at her sides.
It was now about the time when Bao-chai usually came over from Lady Wang’s
apartment for discussion. Tan-chun and Li Wan stood up to greet her as she entered
and invited her to sit with them. Before they had a chance to begin talking, however,
one of the women who had been waiting outside came in to make her report.
Because Tan-chun had recently been crying, three or four maids had already been to
fetch water and towels and a hand-mirror so that she could wash her face. As she
was at this moment sitting cross-legged on a low wooden couch, the maid carrying
the hand-basin went down on both her knees to bring it to a convenient level for her,
whereupon the girls bearing the towels, hand-mirror, cosmetics and so forth also
knelt down on either side. Seeing that Tan-chun’s body-servant Scribe was not
present, Patience hurriedly stepped forward, rolled back Tan-chun’s sleeves for her,
removed her bracelets and tucked a large towel round her neck to protect the front
of her dress. As Tan-chun stretched out her hands to begin washing, the woman who
had just entered began to make her report:
‘Excuse me Mrs Zhu; excuse me Miss Tan. The school want to draw this year’s
allowance for Master Huan and Master Lan.’
‘What’s the hurry?’ snapped Patience. ‘Haven’t you got eyes in your head? Can’t
you see that Miss Tan is washing? You ought to be waiting outside. What do you
mean by bursting in like this? Would you behave like this if Mrs Lian were here? Miss
Tan is a kind young lady and lets you get away with it, but if I tell Mrs Lian when I get
back how little respect you show her, you’ll be in serious trouble - and don’t say I
didn’t warn you!’
Thoroughly alarmed, the woman put on her broadest smile and retreated,
apologizing, from the room.
Tan-chun, who had finished washing and was now making up her face, looked up at
Patience with a sardonic smile:
‘It’s a pity you didn’t come a bit earlier. You missed the best part of the comedy. Wu
xin-deng’s wife, who has spent a whole lifetime in service, came here without having
bothered to look up the records, in the hope of making us look foolish. Fortunately I
thought to ask her what the rule was; but then she had the effrontery to tell me that
she had forgotten. I told her that I didn’t think she would forget things and have to go
off and look them up if it was your mistress that she was dealing with.’
‘I should think not, indeed!’ said Patience. ‘If she had ever tried a trick like that on
Mrs Lian, she’d have some nasty scars on her backside to show for it, I can tell you!
Don’t you believe any of them, miss! They think that because Mrs Zhu is such a kind,
saintly person and you are such a quiet, shy young lady they can get away with
anything.’
She turned to address the women who were standing outside the door:
‘Keep it up all of you! Just carry on with these little tricks! See what happens to you
when Mrs Lian is better!’
‘Now, now, you know us better than that, miss!’ said the women, laughing. “‘Let
him face the summons that did the offence”. We wouldn’t pull the wool over a young
mistress’s eyes. We know perfectly well that if a young unmarried lady like Miss Tan
was to get really angry with us, it would be more than our lives was worth.’
‘Well, as long as you know, that’s all tight,’ said Patience drily. She turned back to
Tan-chun. ‘I’m sure you must realize, miss: Mrs Lian is much too busy to think of
everything and there must be quite a few things that she’s over?1ooked, They say
“the bystander sees all”, and during the years that you’ve been quietly looking on as
a bystander you may have noticed cases in which more or perhaps less ought to be
given that Mrs Lian herself has never got around to dealing with. If you were to take
this opportunity of putting them right, you’d be doing Her Ladyship a good turn and
at the same time it would be a kindness to my mistress which I’m sure she would
appreciate.’
Before she bad finished, Bao-chai and Li Wan were both laughing.
‘Patience, you’re wonderful! No wonder Feng is so devoted to you. The way you’ve
just put it, you make us feel that even if there are no grounds for altering the rules,
we ought to try and find some, just so as not to disappoint you!’
Tan-chun joined in their laughter:
‘I still feel very angry. Until she came along, I was hoping to work some of it off on
her mistress, but she’s been so reasonable about it all that I hardly know what to do!’
She called in the woman whom Patience had chased out a few minutes earlier.
‘What are these allowances for Master Huan and Master Lan that the school is
asking for?’
‘Eight taels each a year, miss. It’s for paper, writing-brushes and refreshments.’
‘But these expenses are already provided for in the monthly allowances,’ said
Tan-chun. ‘Mrs Zhao gets two taels a month for Huan, Aroma gets two a month for
Bao-yu from Her Ladyship, and Lan’s expenses are covered by Mrs Zhu’s allowance.
Why should we pay an additional eight taels for each of them to the school? Is that
what they go to school for, to collect the money? I think we should cancel that
payment from now on. Patience, go back and tell your mistress: I insist that these
payments should be discontinued.’
‘They should have been long ago,’ said Patience. ‘Mrs Lian had decided to stop
them last year, but with so much going on over the New Year, she forgot about it.’
The woman who had come for the allowances had to go off empty-handed.
Women from Prospect Garden now arrived carrying food-boxes containing Li Wan’s
and Tan-chun’s lunch. They were preceded by the maids Scribe and Candida who
carried a little table between them which they put down in front of their mistresses.
Patience busied herself by taking dishes from the food-boxes and putting them on
the table; but Tan-chun stopped her:
‘If you have nothing more to say, you had better be about your own business. There
is nothing for you to do here.’
‘I haven’t got any other business,’ said Patience, smiling. ‘That’s why Mrs Lian sent
me here. Partly it was to bring you the message, but partly it was because she was
afraid the servants here might be giving you trouble and she thought I might be able
to make myself useful.’
‘Why hasn’t Miss Bao’s lunch been brought here so that she can eat with us?’
Tan-chun inquired.
At once one of the maids went outside and gave an order to the women who were
waiting there under the eaves:
‘Miss Bao’s going to have her lunch here with the other young ladies. Tell them to
bring it here.’
The raised voice of Tan-chun, who had overheard her, issued from behind her in
reproof:
‘Who are you ordering about like that? Those are stewardesses out there and
senior members of the domestic staff. You can’t make them run to and fro fetching
and carrying things for you. Have you no respect for seniority? Patience is standing
around here with nothing to do: why don’t you get her to go?’
Not waiting to be ordered, Patience murmured something and hurried out; but the
women outside silently waylaid her and with broad smiles prevented her from going.
‘We can’t let you go, miss: that would never do! In any case, we’ve already sent
someone.’
They dusted the steps with their handkerchiefs and invited her to sit down:
‘There you are, miss, sit there in the sun and rest yourself. You must be tired after
standing about for so long.’
Patience was about to sit down when two women from the tea-kitchen rushed up to
her with a rug:
‘That stone’s too cold to sit on. Here’s a nice clean rug. You sit on this, miss.’
Patience smiled and nodded:
‘Thank you very much.’
Another woman came out carrying a cup of tea for her on a tray.
‘Here you are, miss,’ she whispered. ‘This isn’t the tea we usually drink. This is the
kind we make for the mistresses. Try some of that for a change.’
Patience bowed and took the cup, then, shaking a reproving finger at the women,
she admonished them in a voice that she kept low so as not to be audible inside:
‘You’ve gone too far this time and no mistake! Miss Tan is a real little lady, but just
because she is too well-bred to throw her weight about, it doesn’t mean that you can
afford to take advantage of her. On the contrary, you ought to respect her all the
more for it. If she were ever to get really angry, my word you would be in trouble! It
wouldn’t just be a question of saying “sorry” then. If she took it into her head to
throw a tantrum, even Her Ladyship would have to give in to her. Mrs Lian certainly
wouldn’t stand in her way, she wouldn’t dare. So just what makes you so bold against
her I do not know. You might just as well pelt a rock with eggs as set yourselves up
against her!’
‘We wouldn’t dare set ourselves up against her,’ said the women. ‘This was all Mrs
Zhao’s doing.’
‘Oh, come on now!’ said Patience, still speaking in a half?whisper. ‘Everyone likes to
push a falling wall. We all know that Mrs Zhao isn’t the most sensible of mortals. She
doesn’t know whether she’s coming or going half the time. It’s just a bit too easy to
blame it all on her when things go wrong. Do you think after all the years I’ve been
here I don’t know how unmanageable and how ruthless you can be? If Mrs Lian were
just a shade less determined, she’d have been finished off by you lot years ago. As it
is, you only need half a chance to start making things difficult for her. Many and
many’s the time she’s nearly come unstuck because of your whispering. Everyone’s
always saying what a holy terror she is and how you’re all afraid of her. I’m probably
the only one who realizes that in her heart of hearts she’s actually afraid of you. As a
matter of fact she and I were talking about this only the other day. We both agreed
that if you didn’t make yourselves a bit more accommodating, there were sure to be
one or two explosions. Miss Tan may be only a young girl, but you’re completely
mistaken in treating her like this. Even Mrs Lian is a tiny bit scared of Miss Tan. Of all
the young ladies in this household Miss Tan is the only one she feels that way about.
And yet you think you can do what you like with her!’
Just then Ripple approached and the women all crowded round to greet her.
‘Better stay outside with us for a bit, miss,’ they said. ‘They’ve just laid for lunch
inside. Better wait until they take the table away before going in to report anything.’
‘I’m not like you,’ said Ripple loftily. ‘I can’t wait.’
She began mounting the steps.
‘Come back at once!’ Patience called after her.
Ripple looked back and saw that it was Patience.
‘Oh, what are you doing here? Sentry duty?’
She came down again then and sat beside Patience on the rug.
‘What have you come about?’ Patience asked her in a low voice.
‘I want to ask about Bao-yu’s and our allowances for this month. We’ve been
wondering when we’re going to get them.’
‘Oh that!’ said Patience. ‘That’s not very important. Go back and tell Aroma this -
say I told you to tell her: no matter what it is, don’t come here asking for anything
today. Anything you ask for will be refused. If you ask for a hundred things, one after
the other, the answer will be “no” every time.’
‘Why’s that?’ said Ripple.
Patience and the women explained, pointing out that to go in and ask for something
on Bao-yu’s behalf at the very moment when Tan-chun was looking around for
someone of consequence to make an example of would be simply courting disaster.
‘There’s no sense in your going in now,’ said Patience. ‘Either way it will be
awkward. If they make an example of Bao-yu they will risk offending Their Ladyships;
if they don’t make an example of him You Know Who will call it favouritism and
complain that they daren’t provoke anyone who has Their Ladyships behind them
and only take it out on the weak ones who can’t protect themselves. You wait and
see: they’ll even turn down one or two requests from Mrs Lian before they’ve
finished, just to stop certain people talking.’
Ripple stuck her tongue out in a grimace.
‘It’s a good job I met you here. I should only have got smut on my nose if I’d gone
inside. I’d better go back straight away then and tell the others.’
She rose and went away.
Presently Bao-chai’s lunch arrived and Patience went inside again to help serve it. By
this time Aunt Zhao had already left. The three young women sat cross-legged on the
wooden settle around the low lunch-table which had been placed upon it, Bao-chai
facing south, towards the doorway, Tan-chun facing west and Li Wan facing east. Only
their personal maids stayed inside the room to serve them; no one else dared enter.
The women waited quietly on the verandah outside, dis?cussing the situation in
whispers:
‘Better keep out of trouble from now on. Better not try any more funny business.
Look what happened to Mrs Wu, and she’s ever so much senior to us!’
    Their whispered conversation continued intermittently until lunch was over. They
knew it was over when the sound of chopsticks on bowls and dishes ceased and only
an occasional low cough could be heard from inside. Presently a maid appeared in
the doorway and held the portiere up high to let two other maids through who were
carrying out the lunch-table. Another three maids with wash-basins were already
waiting outside who went in as soon as the other two had finished carrying out the
table. Soon they too came out again, each carrying a wash-basin as before and also a
spittoon. Then Scribe, Candida and Oriole arrived, each with a covered teacup on a
tray, and went in. A little later this last trio reemerged. As they did so, Scribe stopped
for a moment to admonish the junior maids who were remaining behind:
‘Now do your job properly. We’ll be back to relieve you as soon as we’ve had our
lunch. No sneaking off to sit down while we’re away!’
The departure of Scribe and the other two was a signal for the women outside to
begin going in, one by one, to report on their various business. They did this sedately
enough, with none of the careless insolence they had been showing previously.
Tan-chun’s customary good nature gradually reasserted itself and presently she
turned to Patience and addressed her in a normal tone of voice:
‘There’s an important matter that I have been wanting to consult your mistress
about. I’m glad I’ve remembered it now. Come back again as soon as you have
finished your lunch, while Miss Bao is still here, and the four of us can discuss it
together; then, when we’ve worked out all the details, we can ask your mistress
whether to go forward with it or not.’
‘Yes, miss,’ said Patience, and promptly left.
When she got back, Xi-feng asked her why she had been so long and received a full
account of what had happened which greatly entertained her.
‘Good! Good!’ she said. ‘Good for Tan-chun! I always said she’d make an excellent
little manager. Oh, what a pity she wasn’t born in the right bed I’
‘Now you’re talking stupid, madam,’ said Patience. ‘Although she’s not Her
Ladyship’s child by birth, surely no one is going to think any the worse of her because
of that? Won’t she always be treated exactly the same as the rest?’
Xi-feng sighed:
‘I’m afraid it’s not quite as simple as you think. I know being a wife’s or a
concubine’s child is not supposed to make any difference, and in a boy’s case perhaps
it doesn’t; but I’m afraid with girls, when the time comes to start finding husbands
for them, it often does. Nowadays you get a very shallow class of person who will ask
about that before anything else and often, if they hear that the girl is a concubine’s
child, will have nothing further to do with her. It’s silly, really, because if they did but
know it, even the maids in a household like ours are better than the wife’s daughters
in many another household, let alone the daughters of concu?bines. In the case of
girls like Tan-chun and Ying-chun it’s hard to say. They might be unlucky and make a
bad match through being discriminated against, or then again they might be lucky:
someone might come along who didn’t care about these distinctions and they might
make a perfectly good marriage.’
Xi-feng paused for a moment and smiled at Patience confidingly:
‘Because of all the economies I’ve introduced during these last few years there’s
hardly anyone in this household who doesn’t secretly hate me. But it’s like riding a
tiger: I daren’t relax my grip for a single moment for fear of being eaten. In any case,
our expenditure is still far above our income. The trouble is, everything in this
household from the largest down to the smallest item has to be done on a scale and
according to rules that were laid down by our ancestors; but unfortu?nately the
income from our property is not what it was in their days. If we do economize, the
family looks ridiculous, Their Ladyships feel uncomfortable, and the servants
com?plain of our harshness; yet if we don’t economize, in a very few years’ time we
shall be bankrupt.’
‘I know;’ said Patience. ‘And there are three or four young ladies and two or three
young masters to provide for, and Her Old Ladyship: all these big expenses are yet to
come.’
‘Ah, I’ve allowed for them,’ said Xi-feng. ‘Those expenses I think we can just about
manage. Bao-yu’s bride-price and Miss Lin’s dowry won’t involve us in any expense
because Her Old Ladyship will pay them Out of her private savings and Miss Ying will
be taken care of by Sir She. Of the girls, that only leaves Miss Tan and Miss Xi. They’re
not going to cost more than seven or eight thousand each at the outside. Then
there’s Huan: they’re not going to spend all that much on him: say three thousand.
Even if we can’t raise all of that, we can probably get by with a little judicious pruning.
As for Her Old Ladyship: the main things have been paid for already; there will only
be various miscellaneous expenses. Four or five thousand will probably be ample. No,
as long as we can economize a bit, we shall be able to deal with those expenses as
they come along. What really worries me is the possibility of one or two large items
of expenditure turning up which we hadn’t been expecting. Then I am afraid we
really shall be done for!
‘But let’s not worry about these far-off things just now. You must hurry up and have
your lunch so that you can get back and find out what it is they want to talk about.
I’m delighted that things should be turning out in this way. It’s what I’ve. always
wanted, someone to take a bit of the weight off my shoulders. There’s Bao-yu of
course; but he isn’t really one of us, so even if I were to win him over, he wouldn’t be
very much use. Mrs Zhu is such a Holy Buddha, she’s no good. Miss Ying’s even worse
- and anyway she doesn’t properly belong to this household. Miss Xi is still childish.
Lan is little more than a baby. Huan is like a singed cat in the cold, only looking for a
warm stove or a corner of a kang to curl up on - How the same mother could produce
two children such poles apart as him and Tan-chun I never shall under?stand I - Miss
Lin and Miss Bao are both very capable girls, but unfortunately they’re not of our
surname and can’t very well be expected to involve themselves in running our affairs.
And in any case, one of them’s like a beautiful picture-lantern: you feel that a puff of
wind would blow her out; and the other is so determined not to open her mouth
about what doesn’t concern her that a shake or a nod or an “I don’t know” is about
all you can ever get out of her and you feel a bit awk?ward about asking her to do
anything. And that only leaves Miss Tan. She’s got a good mind; she’s good at
expressing herself; she belongs to the right lineage; Her Ladyship likes her; she’s a bit
unsure of herself perhaps, but that’s all the doing of that wretched Zhao woman; in
other respects she’s very much like Bao-yu. She’s certainly not in the least like Huan.
He really is the most objectionable child. If I had my way he’d have been sent packing
long ago. No, if she’s got the determination to do this job, let’s go along with her, I
say. Let’s make an ally of her, so that I don’t have to go on feeling so isolated. From a
high-minded, honourable point of view, having her to help us will save us a good deal
of anxiety, and in the long run Her Ladyship will benefit. But there is also a not so
high-minded, rather more selfish way of looking at it. I’ve been too ruthless, I know I
have. I ought to step back now and take stock of things. I can’t keep the pres?sure up
any longer. People hate me so much already, there are daggers in their smiles. You
and I have only two pairs of eyes between us. If I carry on as I have been doing,
sooner or later they are bound to catch us off our guard and I shall be destroyed. So
you see, her stepping forward and taking command just when things are at their
liveliest means that the heat will be turned off me for the time being and people’s
resentment against me will have a chance to cool down.
There’s something else I want to say to you. I know you are a very intelligent person,
but I am afraid you may find it rather hard to transfer your allegiance, so I want to
impress this on you now. Although Miss Tan may be only a girl, there are very few
things that she doesn’t know about. You mustn’t be taken in by her quiet manner. In
fact, being able to read and write, she’s if anything better equipped to manage things
than I am. Now they always say that anyone who wants to break a gang up should
begin by arresting the leader, and her immediate concern must be to make an
example of someone as a means of establishing her authority. That being so, you can
be quite sure that I shall be the person she’ll pick on first to make an example of. If
she starts criticizing anything I have said or done, don’t try to defend it; just be very
polite and say that the criticism is justified. Don’t, whatever you do, stand up to her
out of a mistaken sense of loyalty to me: that’s the last thing I want you to do.’
Before she could go on, Patience laughingly interrupted her:
‘Why are you so ready to assume that other people are stupid? I’ve been taking
that line with her already; I don’t need you to tell me!’
‘I was afraid you might have no time for anyone but me,’ said Xi-feng. That was my
only reason for warning you. If you have been taking that line with her already, so
much the better. Evidently you are cleverer than I am. By the way, aren’t you perhaps
getting a little carried away - this “you”, “you”, “you” all of a sudden? What’s wrong
with “madam”?’
‘I’ll say “you” if I want to,’ said Patience. ‘If you don’t like it, there’s always my face
to slap. It won’t be the first time it’s enjoyed that privilege!’
‘Little beast!’ said Xi-feng. ‘How many times do you intend to go on dragging that
up? Fancy provoking me with a thing like that when you know how ill I am! Come on!
There aren’t any visitors about. Come over and sit here with me. We’d better get on
with our lunch.’
Felicity and three or four junior maids came in at this point carrying a short-legged
table between them which they set down on the kang. Xi-feng’s lunch consisted of no
more than some bird’s nest soup and a couple of small, light dishes suitable for an
invalid palate. Unable to eat more, she had cancelled the portion that under normal
catering arrangements would have been her due. Felicity put the four dishes to
which Patience was entitled on Xi-feng’s table and filled her a bowlful of rice.
Patience then half sat, half stood with one foot curled underneath her on the edge of
the kang and the other one resting on the floor, and in that position kept Xi-feng
company while she ate her lunch. When they had both finished eating, she helped
Xi-feng to wash and rinse Out her mouth, then, after a few admonitory words to
Felicity, went back to rejoin Tan-chun and the others in the office.
Outside the office building the forecourt was quiet and deserted. The stewardesses
who had formerly been waiting there had now all gone off about their business.
What happened when she went inside will be related in the following chapter.

CHAPTER 56

Resourceful Tan-chun abolishes abuses
in the interests of economy
And sapient Bao-chai shows how small concessions
can be made without loss of dignity
Having kept Xi-feng company while she ate her lunch and waited on her while she
rinsed her mouth out and washed, Patience made her way back to the lobs room’.
The courtyard outside it was quiet now, deserted except for the silent row of maids
and womenservants waiting outside the windows until their mistresses inside the
room should require them. The latter were already in the midst of a discussion. They
were talking about Lai Da’s garden, which they had visited in Grandmother Jia’s
company some months previously on the occasion of the party which had had such
unfortunate consequences for Xue Pan. Tan-chun broke off as Patience entered and
indicated a low stool for her to sit on.
   ‘I’ve been thinking about those two taels we get every month for hair-oil and
cosmetics,’ she told Patience. ‘We already get a monthly allowance of two taels each
and our maids get allowances too. It looks to me as if this is another case of
duplication, like the eight taels paid to the school every year which we were dealing
with earlier. I know it’s not a very important matter, and the sum involved is not very
great, but it’s obvious at a glance that this is a bad arrangement, and I can’t
understand why your mistress hasn’t noticed it.’
   ‘There is a reason,’ said Patience. ‘Obviously you young ladies need a regular fixed
supply of these things, and as there wouldn’t be much sense in our constantly
running out with a few coppers to make individual purchases, the cosmetic
allowances for the various departments are drawn by our buyers and used to make
bulk purchases with. The stewardesses collect monthly supplies from the buyers and
distribute them to the different apartments, and we maids in the different
apartments look after them for use by you as and when you need them. The two-tael
monthly allowance you get is quite separate from the cosmetics money. It isn’t
meant to be spent on cosmetics; it’s simply to keep you in money, so that if the need
should ever arise to spend on something, you shouldn’t have the inconvenience of
finding yourselves short and perhaps running round for some only to find that Her
Ladyship or whoever is in charge at the time is out or too busy to see you. I have to
admit though that about half of us do in fact seem to go outside these arrangements
and buy cosmetics with our spending money; but whether it’s because the official
buyers simply pocket the money and don’t deliver the goods, or because the stuff
they supply us with is so inferior, I simply don’t know.’
   Tan-chun and Li Wan exchanged knowing smiles.
   ‘You’ve noticed, too, then,’ said Tan-chun. ‘I don’t think they actually embezzle the
money, but sometimes the supply is very much delayed. If you try to hurry them they
produce something so awful that it is quite unusable, and in the end you are forced
to buy your own. There’s only one way of doing that, too. You have to give a couple
of taels to a nannie and ask her to get one of her sons or nephews to buy it for you.
It’s no good trying to do it through the regular staff. If you do, you only get the same
awful, unusable stuff as before, I don’t know why.’
   ‘It’s because if they bought you stuff of better quality, they’d be in trouble with the
regular buyers,’ said Patience. ‘The regular buyers would complain that they were
trying to do them out of a job. They’d rather offend you than risk offending the
buyers. Of course, if you get the stuff through your nannies, there’s nothing the
buyers can do about it’
   ‘Well, I am very uneasy about the whole arrangement,’ said Tan-chun. ‘Here we
are paying the same money twice over and half the stuff that is paid for has to be
wasted. It would be much better if this monthly payment to the buyers were
abolished altogether. That’s one thing. Another thing is this. Last year when we went
to Lai Da’s place, you went too. What did you think of that little garden of theirs?
How do you think it compares with ours?’
   ‘It’s not half as big,’ said Patience, ‘and it has far, far fewer trees and flowers and
things in it.
   ‘I got talking to one of the daughters while we were there,’ said Tan-chun. ‘That
garden of theirs is let out annually on contract. She told me that quite apart from
supplying them through the year with flowers for their hair and with all the
bamboo-shoots, vegetables and fish that they eat, it brings them in an annual
income of two hundred taels of silver. Ever since that day I have realized that even a
broken lotus-leaf or a withered grass-root is worth something.’
   Bao-chai laughed.
   ‘There speaks the voice of gilded youth. How typical! But even though, O
delicately-nurtured one, you have no immediate experience of such matters, you can,
after all, read and write. Surely you must at some time or other have read Zhuxius’s
essay “On Not Throwing Away”?’
   ‘Yes,’ said Tan-chun, ‘but in that essay isn’t he merely urging the people, in a fairly
general sort of way, to exert themselves? And isn’t it all rather empty and rhetorical?
Surely he didn’t mean every word of it to be taken literally?’
   ‘Zhuxius empty and rhetorical?’ said Bao-chai. ‘He meant every word of it. If, after
only a few days of household management, the greed for gain has already so clouded
your judgement that the teachings of Zhuxius seem empty and rhetorical, I fancy that
if you were to venture outside into the corrupting atmosphere of the market-place,
you would soon be finding even Confucius himself too abstract for you!’
   ‘Since you are so learned,’ said Tan-chun, ‘I’m surprised that you should appear to
be unfamiliar with the views of Fixius. Fixius once said, “Whosoever sets his foot in
the market-place or takes his seat at the counting-board must forget about Yao and
Shun and turn his back on the teachings of Confucius and Mencius...”‘
   ‘How does it go on?’ said Bao-chai.
   ‘I must claim the quoter’s privilege of giving only as much of the text as will suit my
purpose,’ said Tan-chun. ‘If I told you how it went on, I should end up by
contradicting myself!’
   ‘Everything in the world has some use or other,’ said Bao-?chai, ‘and if it has a use,
it must have a monetary value. Surely to an intelligent person like you so obvious a
truism can hardly have come as a revelation?’
   ‘You call people here to discuss important business,’ said Li Wan, ‘but all we have
had so far is talk about books!’
   ‘But talk about books is important business,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Without it we should
be no better than vulgar tradesmen I’
   The three of them continued chaffing a little longer before Tan-chun returned to
her theme:
   ‘Let’s say for the sake of argument that our garden is only twice as big as theirs.
Doubling the income they get from theirs would mean a clear profit of four hundred
taels per annum. Now of course, a family like ours couldn’t possibly put its garden
under contract and turn it into a business in the way that they do it would look too
mercenary. On the other hand, when you know how valuable everything is, it seems
a terrible waste of natural resources not to have a few people whose special job is to
look after it and just let everyone trample on it and despoil it as they please. I think
we ought to pick out a few experienced trustworthy old women from among the
ones who work in the Garden - women who know something about gardening
already - and put the upkeep of the Garden into their hands. We needn’t ask them to
pay us rent; all we need ask them for is an annual share of the produce. There would
be four advantages in this arrangement. In the first place, if we have people whose
sole occupation is to look after trees and flowers and so on, the condition of the
garden will improve gradually year after year and there will be no more of those long
periods of neglect followed by bursts of feverish activity when things have been
allowed to get out of hand. Secondly there won’t be the spoiling and wastage we get
at present. Thirdly the women themselves will gain a little extra to add to their
incomes which will compensate them for the hard work they put in throughout the
year. And fourthly, there’s no reason why we shouldn’t use the money we should
otherwise have spent on nurserymen, rockery specialists, horticultural cleaners and
so on for other purposes.’
   “‘And after three years there shall be no more famine nor hunger in the land”,’
Bao-chai intoned. (She had wandered off in the course of Tan-chun’s exposition and
was examining some calligraphy on the wall.)
‘It’s a very good idea,’ said Li Wan. ‘If we could really do this, I’m sure Lady Wang
would be pleased. It’s not so much the saving of money that’s important; but if there
are going to be people whose special job is to look after the Garden and they are
allowed to make a little money out of it as well, then what with “the allurement of
status” on the one hand and “the incentive of gain” on the other, they are sure to
make a good job of it.’
‘It needed you to suggest this, miss,’ said Patience. ‘My mistress has thought of
something like this in the past, but she hasn’t liked to mention it to anyone, because
she thought that now all you young ladies are living in the Garden you might feel that
we ought to be spending more on it rather than less and if she had people snooping
around in it making economies you might feel that that really was the last straw.’
Bao-chai walked over and began feeling Patience’s face:
‘Open your mouth, Patience: I want to see what your teeth are made of. Ever since
early this morning you’ve been keeping up this tune. You never give Miss Tan credit
for anything. You never admit that Mrs Lian is less than perfect and that there are
things she may not have thought of. Whenever Miss Tan has finished saying
something, you come back at her with the same refrain: your mistress has thought of
that too, only for some compelling reason or other she hasn’t been able to do
anything about it. This time you tell us that she didn’t like to save money by putting
the Garden under super?vision because of us living there.’
She turned to the others:
‘She’s right, of course. If you do hand this Garden over to a few of the old women
to look after, they will naturally be unwilling that a single fruit or flower that they
have charge over should be picked. Obviously where we are concerned they will not
dare to say anything; but it is sure to prove a source of endless quarrelling with the
maids. Patience is far?seeing enough to realize this and, in her own inimitable way,
without fear or flattery, she gives us warning. How tactful she is! Even if we weren’t
on good terms with her mistress, I think after hearing Patience we should be shamed
into making our peace with her!’
‘And I was so angry this morning,’ said Tan-chun. ‘When I heard that Patience had
come, I suddenly thought of her mistress and the insufferable behaviour of those
henchwomen of hers - which she, no doubt, encourages and it made me even angrier.
But Patience was so quiet and timid, like a poor little mouse that the cat has been
after, and stood there all the time so meekly; and when she did speak, it was not to
remind me of the many kindnesses that I owe her mistress, but to tell me that if I
decided to make any changes, I should be doing her mistress a kindness which she
was “sure she would appreciate”. It really wrung my heart when she said that. Not
only did I stop feeling angry then; I felt ashamed. “Here am I,” I thought, “only a
young girl, but behaving in such a way that nobody can ever like me or care what
happens to me. When shall I ever be in a position to do anyone a kindness?”’
At this point her emotion got the better of her and she shed some tears. The others,
moved by the sincerity with which she had spoken and remembering how Aunt Zhao
was con?stantly maligning her and making things difficult for her with Lady Wang,
were themselves moved to tears of sympathy; but they did their best to rally her.
‘What better return can we possibly make Lady Wang for placing her trust in us,’
said Li Wan, ‘than to take advantage of the fact that things are a little quieter now by
discussing some much-needed economies? What do you want to go bringing in an
unimportant matter like that for?’
‘I’ve got the gist of your plan, Miss,’ said Patience. ‘All you need do now is tell us
which of the women you want to appoint and we can go straight ahead with it.’
‘That’s all very well,’ said Tan-chun, ‘but you ought to have a word with your
mistress about it first. It was a bit presumptuous of us to go poking about and making
these little economies in the first place - I should never have ventured to do so if I
hadn’t known that your mistress was so understanding: if she’d been a stupid or
touchy person, she might have suspected me of trying to shine at her expense All the
same, the very least we can do is to consult her first.’
‘Very well,’ said Patience pleasantly. ‘I’ll go and tell her, then.’
She was gone for some time, but returned eventually, full of smiles:
‘I knew it wasn’t necessary to go. Of course she agrees. A good idea like this: how
could she do otherwise?’
As soon as Tan-chun had received this confirmation, she and Li Wan sent for the list
of women employed in the Garden. Bao-chai joined them in scrutinizing it and in
making a pro?visional selection of those most likely to be suitable. These were
summoned forthwith and Li Wan, addressing them in a group, outlined the scheme
to them in general terms. The women were enthusiastic.
‘Let me have the bamboo,’ said one of them. ‘I’ll have double the amount growing
within a year. I can keep you in bamboo-shoots for the kitchen and pay you an annual
rent for it as well.’
‘Let me have that bit of rice-paddy,’ said another. ‘I’ll keep you in grain for your
cage-birds so that you don’t have to spend money on feed, and I’ll pay you annual
tent.’
Before Tan-chun could say anything, someone arrived with a message:
‘The doctor’s arrived. He’s waiting to come into the Garden to have a look at Miss
Shi.’
‘Just a moment!’ said Patience as the women went scurry?ing off to escort the
doctor. ‘There’s no point in a hundred people going if there isn’t anyone responsible
to receive him.’
‘Wu xin-deng’s wife and Mrs Shan are already waiting for him at the Painted Gate
on the south-west corner of the Garden,’ said the woman who had brought the
message.
When Patience heard that, she made no further objection.
After the women had gone, Tan-chun looked at Bao-chai inquiringly:
‘Well?’
Bac-chal laughed:
“‘He who shows most enthusiasm in the beginning proves often to be a sluggard in
the end; and he who promises the fairest is often thinking more of his profit than of
his performance.”’
Tan-chun nodded in agreement and praised the aptness of the quotation. She turned
to the register once more and pointed out a few more names for the other two to
con?sider. Patience fetched a brush and inkstone for her to write with.
‘Mamma Zhu is a very reliable body,’ said the others of one of these. ‘Her old man
used to be a bamboo specialist and her son still is; it’s in the family. She’s the one we
should put in charge of all the bamboos in the Garden. And Mamma Tian comes
from a farming family. The farm at Sweet-rice Village may be only a plaything and not
meant for serious cultivation, but if she were in charge of all those vegetable and
paddy strips and doing the things that needed doing at the proper times, we should
probably get a lot more out of it.’
‘When you think of the amount of land that goes with them, it seems a pity that
All-spice Court and Green Delights don’t produce anything marketable,’ said
Tan-chun.
‘Oh, but they do!’ said Li Wan. ‘Especially All-spice Court. Half the aromatics sold in
perfumers’ shops and on the herb stalls at markets and temple fairs come from
plants like the ones grown in All-spice. I wouldn’t be surprised if there were more
profit to be had out of them than out of anything else that this Garden produces. And
as for Green Delights: to mention nothing else, just look at all the flowers produced
by that rosa rugosa during the spring and summer months! And all the rambler roses
and monthly roses and rosa glabra and honeysuckle and wistaria on the pergolas:
think how much you could make out of them if the flowers were dried properly and
sold to tea-merchants for flavouring!’
Tan-chun nodded enthusiastically.
‘But,’ she reflected, ‘we haven’t got anyone who knows the art of flower-drying,
have we?’
‘The mother of Miss Bao’s maid Oriole knows all about that sort of thing,’ said
Patience. ‘Don’t you remember her drying a lot of flowers once and filling little
baskets and gourds with them to make us presents?’
‘Is this the thanks I get for praising you?’ Bao-chai asked Patience.
‘What can you mean?’ said the others, in some surprise.
You can't possibly give the job to her,' said Bao-chai. 'You have so many able and
willing women of your own who won't be getting any of these jobs: they are going to
think very poorly of me if they know that I am responsible for bringing in an outsider.
I can think of someone that you could give this job to, though: Old Mamma Ye at
Green Delights - Tealeaf's mother. She's a very honest old woman; and what's more,
she is on very good terms with Oriole's mother. You'd much better give the job to her.
She will probably consult Oriole's mother whenever there is anything she is not sure
about in any case. She may even elect to hand over to her altogether. But that would
be entirely a private matter between the two of them. The other servants might
resent it, but at least they couldn't blame us. The advantage of this arrangement is
that it would look fair as well as being effective.'
Li Wan and Patience agreed. Tan-chun was more sceptical:
'That may be; but what if cupidity proves stronger than friendship?'
'Not likely in this case,' said Patience. 'Only the other day Mamma Ye was invited to
become Oriole's godmother. The three of them had a little party to celebrate. The
two families are very close.'
Tan-chun dropped her objection and proceeded, with the others, to deliberate on the
rest of their choices - all of them women whom the four of them had mentally noted
in the past for their dependability. As each one's selection was confirmed, she made
a little circle with her writing-brush against the corresponding name in the register.
Shortly after this the women arrived back again to report that the doctor had gone
and to hand in the prescription he had left. After studying it, Li Wan, Tan-chun and
Bao-chai sent one of the women to obtain the drugs from outside and to supervise
the making-up and administering of the medicine. Then Li Wan and Tan-chun told the
women which of them were to have the cultivation of which parts of the Garden and
what the conditions of their tenure were to be:
'You will be expected to give us, in due season, a fixed amount of your crops for our
own use; but apart from that it will be up to you to make whatever profit from them
you can.
Accounts will be submitted and dues paid at the end of the year.'
'I've been having second thoughts about that,' said Tan?-chun. 'If you are submitting
annual accounts and paying dues, presumably it will be to the Office. But that means
another lot of people with control over you and another layer skimmed off your
profits. Now in thinking up this new arrangement and appointing you ourselves, we
are already in a sense going above their heads, which is sure to anger them. They
probably won't dare to say anything about it now, but there will be nothing to stop
them getting their own back later on when you go round to settle accounts with
them at the end of the year. And there's another thing. If they are going to be in on
this, they are sure to expect a share of the produce. Whatever you agree to give us in
the course of each year, they will expect the equivalent of half the amount for
themselves. That's an old, established rule. Everyone knows that. But since the new
arrangement is our creation, I say let's keep it out of their hands altogether. If there's
to be an annual settling of accounts, let it be done here, internally.'
'If you ask me,' said Bao-chai, I don't think there should be any settling of accounts at
all. You'd always be finding that this one had too much and that one too little. It
would only be a lot of extra trouble. Why not get each of them to take over some
regular item of your expenditure and pay for it out of their profits? That will keep it
all inside the Garden. I've just been running over in my mind what your regular
expenses are. They aren't very many. There's hair-oil, cos?metics, incense, paper:
every mistress and her maids get a fixed amount of those every month. Then there
are brushes, dust-pans, feather-dusters and food for the livestock (birds, rabbits, deer
and so forth). That's really all. Now suppose instead of drawing money from Accounts
for all those things we gave these women the responsibility of paying for them:
how much do you reckon the saving would be?'
'They're small items in themselves,' said Patience, 'but I should think if you added
them all together the total annual saving would be well over four hundred taels.'
'There you are I' said Bao-chai. 'Four hundred a year, eight hundred in two years: you
could buy a small house for letting with that or add half an acre of poor farm-land to
your landholdings. But though there should be quite a lot left over after they have
covered the expenses we are assigning to them, we want them to have a little
something to spend on themselves after working hard all through the year; and
though, from our point of view, the main object of these operations is economy, we
don’t want to overdo it. There would be no point in saving an extra two or three
hundred taels if it meant resorting to undignified methods in order to do so. What
we are now proposing means that Accounts will be paying out four or five hundred
taels a year less than they do now without anyone outside feeling the pinch. And as
for inside, the women doing these jobs will be getting a little extra for themselves,
the ones not doing them will be able to relax a bit, the Garden’s stock of trees and
flowers will thrive and increase through being better cared for, and we shall he better
off when we have this regular supply of the produce for our own use - all this without
any loss of dignity. Whereas if we went all out to economize with no other
consideration but making money in mind, no doubt we should have little difficulty in
squeezing more out, but the effect of paying everything back into the common
account would be wails of protest from everyone, both inside the Garden and out,
and a consequent loss of dignity that in a household like yours would be quite
un?acceptable.
‘Altogether there must be several dozen old women working in this Garden. If you
give the money-making jobs to these few here and leave the others out in the cold,
the others are going to complain that it isn’t fair. Now as I said, there’s still going to
be quite a lot of money left over when they’ve finished paying these various
expenses for you, and I think we should be letting them off a bit too lightly if we let
them keep all of it. Why don’t we say that every year, no matter how much or how
little they have made, they are to pay so many strings of cash into a common pool
which will be shared out among all the other women? Although those others won’t
any longer have anything to do with the upkeep of the Garden, they are responsible,
day and night, for keeping an eye on the other servants; they have the responsibility
of opening and closing the gates, which means that they have to get up earlier and
go to bed later than everyone else; and whenever any of us go out, whatever the
weather, even if it is raining or snowing heavily, they have to carry sedans, punt boats,
draw sledges - in fact do any heavy work that needs to be done. Since they work so
hard in the Garden from one year’s end to the next, it seems only fair that if any
money is going to be made out of the Garden, they should have a share in it. And
there’s another reason for this, if it doesn’t seem too petty-minded to mention it’ -
Bao-chai turned to the women to explain - ‘If you think only of how much you can
make out of this for yourselves and don’t let the others have a share, they are sure to
feel resentful even if they don’t like to say anything and will try to make up for it by
misappropriating what they can for their own use - filching a fruit here and a flower
there whenever they have the opportunity. Whereas if they know in advance that
they are going to get a share of whatever you make from your produce, they will be
as anxious as you are that none of it is stolen and will even keep an eye on it for you
when you aren’t able to watch over it yourselves.’
The women were quick to see the force of this argument - no control by the Office,
no settling of accounts with Xi-feng, only a few strings of cash to pay out every year.
They were all of them delighted and accepted these conditions unani?mously.
‘Better than being pushed around by Accounts,’ they said. ‘If we were paying them
anything, they’d want a dash on top of it for themselves.’
Those of the women present who were not getting one of the gardening jobs, when
they heard that they were going to be given money at the end of every year without
having to do anything to earn it, were, if anything, even more delighted -though for
politeness’ sake they pretended to demur:
‘After all the hard work they’ll be putting into it they ought to have a bit extra for
themselves. Doesn’t seem right that we should sit back and collect the jackpot
without having to do anything for it!’
‘Don’t refuse the offer,’ said Bao-chai, smiling. ‘It’s no less than you deserve. As
long as you continue to keep a close watch on things and don’t get slack and allow
people to drink and gamble. Otherwise it puts me in such an awkward position. This
isn’t really my business, of course; but as you have no doubt heard, my aunt has
repeatedly urged me to take over responsibility for it on the grounds that Mrs Zhu is
too busy and the other young ladles are too young to attend to it. I can’t refuse her,
knowing that to do so would be deliberately adding to her worries. She has such
indifferent health and so many household cares and I have so little to do myself that
even if she were only a neighbour and not my aunt, I could scarcely refuse to help her.
It’s no good worrying that I shall make myself unpopular. If I care only about being
popular and allow people to drink and gamble as much as they like, sooner or later
someone who has drunk too much will start a quarrel. If an incident like that were to
happen, how should I be able to look my aunt in the face? And think what it would
be like for you. You would have forfeited your reputation as responsible seniors that
you have taken so many years to build up. After all, the reason all these dozens of
maids and the whole of this great Garden have been placed under your supervision is
because you have served here under three or four generations of masters and are
considered more dependable than any of the other servants. At a time when we all
ought to be doing our best to keep up appearances, you will have allowed other
people to drink and gamble. It will be bad enough if my aunt gets to hear of it and
gives you a talking-to; but what if you are found out by the stewardesses and they
decide to discipline you themselves without bothering to tell my aunt? What a
disgrace, that people of your years should be punished by servants younger than
yourselves. They would be within their rights, of course. As stewardesses they have
power over all other members of the staff. But how much better if you conducted
yourselves in such a way that you could keep your self-respect and not be in a
position where they had you at their mercy! That is why I have thought of this plan
for bringing you in a little extra money. I am hoping that everyone will now
collaborate to make this Garden such a model of discipline and good management
that those who have the power to intervene, when they see how tight a discipline
you are able to keep by yourselves, will decide that there is nothing for them to
worry about and will respect you and leave you alone. Then we shall feel that the
trouble we have taken in planning this little extra income for you was justified. Think
about it!’
The women were all smiles of pleasure:
‘You’re right, Miss Bao. Don’t worry, Mrs Zhu and young ladies both! We should be
lost souls indeed if we didn’t show a bit of consideration for you after you have been
so kind and thoughtful to us!’
At that moment Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife came in:
‘The Zhen family from Nanking arrived in town yesterday. Today they have gone to
the Palace to offer their felicitations. Some of their people have just arrived here to
pay their respects. They have brought presents with them.’
She held out the list of presents with both hands. Tan-chun took it from her and ran
her eye over it:

Imperial use decorated satins and mang satins                               12 lengths
Imperial use satins, various 12 lengths
Imperial use gauzes, in different shades     12 lengths
Imperial use Palace taffetas 12 lengths
Official use satins, gauzes, taffetas and damasks in various colours   24 lengths

When Li Wan too had seen the list, she told Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife to use the largest size
of gratuity packet for tipping the bearers with. She also sent someone to report to
Grandmother Jia, who sent word back that Li Wan, Tan-chun and Bao-chai were to
come over and inspect the presents. After they had done so, Li Wan told the women
in charge of the store-room to wait until Lady Wang had got back and had a look at
them before putting them into store.
‘The Zhens are rather special people,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘You had better use
one of the largest gratuity packets when you are tipping the bearers. And you’d
better get some cloth-lengths ready: I expect we shall have some of their women
arriving shortly, to pay their respects.’
   The words were scarcely out of her mouth when the arrival of four women from
the Zhen household was announced. Grandmother Jia at once gave orders that they
should be brought in. All four were sober matrons of forty years or more and so
genteelly dressed that it would have been im?possible to guess from their
appearance that they were servants. When the formal salutations and the inquiries
after Grand?mother Jia’s health had been completed, the old lady called for
footstools to be brought for them to sit on. They acknowledged the courtesy but
waited until Bao-chai and the others were seated before they would sit down
themselves. When Grandmother Jia asked them when they had arrived in town, they
stood up again to reply:
   ‘We arrived yesterday. Today Her Ladyship has had to take our young lady to the
Palace, so she has sent us to offer you her respects and ask after the young ladies.’
   ‘It’s many years since they have been to the capital,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘It’s
rather unexpected, that they should suddenly turn up like this.’
  The women smiled:
  ‘Yes, madam. They had an Imperial Summons to come this year.’
‘Have they all come?’ said Grandmother Jia.
  ‘No, madam. Her Old Ladyship and the young master and our fourth and fifth
young ladies and the other ladles all stayed at home. Only Her Ladyship and our third
young lady have accompanied the Master on this journey.’
  ‘Is your third young lady betrothed yet?’ said Grandmother Jia.
  ‘No, madam, not yet.’
  ‘Your first and second young ladies both married into families on very good terms
with ours,’ said Grandmother Jia.
  ‘Yes, madam,’ said the spokeswoman. ‘Every year when they write home they tell
us how much they are beholden to you for your kind concern.’
  Grandmother Jia laughed deprecatingly:
  ‘One could hardly call it that. Our families have known each other for so long and
we are connected by marriage: it’s only right that we should take an interest in them.
We are particularly fond of your second young lady. She is so unassuming, in spite of
her rank. I think I could say, without offence, that we have grown quite attached to
her.’
  The women laughed:
  ‘You are too polite, madam.’
Grandmother Jia pursued her questioning:
‘Your young master lives with his grandmother, then?’
 ‘Yes, madam.’
 ‘How old is he? Has he started school yet?’
   ‘Thirteen this year,’ said the woman. ‘He has started school, but he is always
playing truant. He has always been naughty, since he was little. He’s a good-looking
boy, though, and his grandmother’s favourite, so there’s not much his father and
mother can do about it.’
   Grandmother Jia was greatly diverted.
   ‘Just like us! And what is his name?’
   ‘Well, because she says he is her “treasure” and because he has such a milky-white
complexion, his grandmother calls him “Bao-yu”. That means “Precious Jade”, you
see.’
   Grandmother Jia turned to Li Wan, laughing:
   ‘Fancy that! He’s even called Bao-yu, too.’
   Li Wan inclined politely
   ‘Coincidences over names have always been common, whether among
contemporaries or among people of different periods.’
   ‘We did wonder, after he was given this name, whether there wasn’t some family
of our acquaintance in the capital in which the name had already been used,’ said the
woman; ‘but as it was ten or more years since we’d been there, we couldn’t
remember for sure whether there was or not.’
   ‘It’s my grandson’s name,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Come here, someone.’
   ‘Hei!’ shouted the womenservants in attendance, and a few of them stepped
forward.
   ‘Go over to the Garden and tell our Bao-yu to come here so that our visitors can
have a look at him and tell us how he compares with their Bao-yu.’
The women hurried off in obedience to her order and returned after ten minutes or
so with Bao-yu in their midst. When the four women from the Zhen household saw
him enter, they hurriedly rose to their feet.
   ‘You gave us quite a turn,’ they said. ‘If we hadn’t been here and had met you in
some other place, we’d have thought that our own Bao-yu must have followed after
to join us!’
   They took him by the hand and made much of him, plying him with all sorts of
questions. Bao-yu smiled back at them and greeted them politely.
   ‘Well, how does he compare with yours?’ Grandmother Jia asked them.
   ‘It would appear that the two Bao-yus are very like each other from what they
have already said,’ Li Wan remarked.
   ‘I doubt such a coincidence is possible,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Children of the
upper classes, especially if they are reared delicately and provided they are not
pock-marked or ill-favoured, are all much of a muchness as far as good looks are
concerned. There would be nothing remarkable in a slight resemblance between
them.’
   ‘In appearance he is exactly like our Bao-yu,’ said the women; ‘but though Your
Ladyship was saying just now that he is mischievous, I think your Bao-yu must be
better-tempered than ours.’
   ‘Oh?’ said Grandmother Jia, immediately interested. ‘Why do you think that?’
   ‘Because he let us hold his hand just now when we talked to him. If it had been our
young gentleman, he would have called us “old fools”. We are not allowed to lay a
finger on any of his things even, let alone take him by the hand. The only servants he
will have about him are young girls.’
   Before they could go on, Li Wan, Tan-chun and Bao-chai had burst out laughing.
Grandmother Jia was laughing too:
   ‘I’m sure that if I were to send some of my women to see your Bao-yu now and
they took him by the hand, he would somehow or other contrive to put up with it.
Children brought up in families like ours, no matter how odd or eccentric they may
be, will always conduct themselves in a courteous, well-bred manner in the presence
of strangers. Otherwise their eccentricity would not be tolerated. In fact, the reason
why grown-ups are so fond of them, though partly because of their good looks, is
mainly because their beautiful manners - much better than many a grown-up’s -
make it such a pleasure to be with them. No one meeting them can help liking them,
and that makes us more tolerant of what they do on their own, when they are out of
sight. But if they were to carry on in exactly the same way all the time, never allowing
the grown-ups to get a word in edgeways, they would be fit for nothing but a
whipping.’
‘That’s true, madam,’ said the women, smiling. ‘Although our Bao-yu is so odd and
mischievous, he can at times, when he is with visitors, behave himself better than a
grown-up, so that it’s a pleasure to watch him. No one who meets him can help liking
him. Often they ask us what his father should want to beat him for, not realizing what
a holy terror he can be inside the family. Sir Zhen and Lady Zhen are driven half
distracted by him. If it were just his wilfulness, which is fairly normal in a child, it
could be cured in time; so could his extravagance, which is normal in the sons of
well-to-do people; and so could his hatred of study, which again is fairly normal in a
young person. But this weird perverseness of his seems to be inbred: there seems to
be no cure for it.’
   Just then Lady Wang’s return was announced. She went straight up to
Grandmother Jia on entering and saluted her, after which she received the
salutations of the four visitors and exchanged a few words with them.
   ‘You are tired,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Go and rest’
Lady Wang served her mother-in-law with some tea before withdrawing to her own
apartment. Shortly after she had gone, the four women took their leave of
Grandmother Jia and went to join her. Lady Wang chatted with them for a while
about family affairs before sending them on their way - suitably primed, of course,
with messages and gratuities: but those are details which need not concern us.

*

Greatly tickled by what the women had told her, Grandmother Jia, for some time
after their visit) would announce to anyone who came to see her:
There is another Bao-yu, you know, exactly like our Bao-yu in every particular.’
The other memhers of the family, bearing in mind that the world was a large place
and instances of the same name among its innumerable upper-class families
probably of not very rare occurrence, and that a grandmother who doted on her
grandson was a fairly unremarkable phenomenon, were unimpressed by the
coincidence and gave little thought to it. But Bao-yu, convinced, like many another
young gentleman, of his own uniqueness, dismissed what the four women had said
as a fabrication designed to give pleasure to his grandmother. He was taunted about
it by Xiang-yun when he visited her in her sick-room in the Garden to see how she
was getting on.
‘You’ll be able to get up to all sorts of mischief now,’ she said. ‘Previously it was a
case of

The single strand makes not a thread Nor the single tree a wood.

We thought there was only one of you. But now you know you are a pair, there will
be no stopping you. If your father beats you really badly, you can always run off to
Nanking and get this other Bao-yu to stand in for you!’
‘You don’t believe that rubbish, do you?’ said Bao-yu. ‘How could there be another
Bao-yu?’
‘There was a Lin Xiang-ru in the Warring States period and a Si-ma Xiang-ru under
the Former Han,’ said Xiang-yun.
‘Yes, but this one’s supposed to look the same as well,’ said Bao-yu. ‘That’s not
something you can find precedents for, surely?’
‘What about when the men of Kuang mistook Confucius for Yang Huo?’ said
Xiang-yun.
Confucius and Yang Huo may have looked the same,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but they didn’t
have the same name. Lin xiang?ru and Si-ma Xiang-ru had the same name but they
didn’t look alike. We are supposed both to have the same name and to look the same.
It isn’t possible.’
Xiang-yun, unable to think of a reply, took the easy way out.
‘Pleathe yourthelf. Whether it is or whether it isn’t, it’s of no concern to me.’
And she lay back on the bed and closed her eyes.
But Bao-yu’s confidence was shaken. Had he a double? When he told himself that he
couldn’t possibly, he now began to feel that perhaps after all he had. On the other
hand how could he be sure that he had when he had never seen him? Brooding on
this uncertainty, he went back to his room and lay down on his bed to ponder it in
silence. Soon he had drifted into sleep.
He was in a garden, which, he remarked with surprise, bore some resemblance to
Prospect Garden. While he was still puzzling over the similarity, he became aware
that some girls were coming towards him, all of them maids. Again he was surprised:
‘Strange that there should be another lot of maids here like Faithful and Aroma and
Patience!’
He observed that they were laughing at him:
‘Bao-yu, what are you doing here?’
Bao-yu, naturally supposing that they meant him, smiled back at them:
‘I’ve strayed in here by accident. I think this garden must belong to some friend or
other of my family. Won’t you take me with you and show me round it?’
‘It isn’t our Bao-yu after all,’ said the girls. ‘He’s not bad-looking, though, and he
sounds reasonably intelligent.’
‘Tell me,’ said Bao-yu eagerly, ‘is there another Bao-yu here then?’
‘Bao-yu?’ rejoined one of the girls sharply. ‘We have Her Old Ladyship’s and Her
Ladyship’s orders to use that name as much as possible as a means of bringing him
luck and Bao-yu likes to hear us use it; but what business has a boy like you from
some remote place outside to be making free with it? Don’t let them catch you doing
that here, boy or they’ll flay your backside for you!’
‘Come, let’s be going,’ said another. ‘We don’t want Bao-yu to see him.’
‘Don’t let’s stand here talking to the nasty creature,’ said a third. ‘We shall be
contaminated!’
And they hurried off.
Bao-yu was nonplussed.
‘No one has ever been as horrid as that to me before. I wonder why they are? And I
wonder if there really is another person exactly like me here.’
As he mused on the unaccountable hostility of the maids, his feet were carrying him
along in no particular direction and presently he found himself inside a courtyard. He
looked around him in some surprise:
‘Strange! There’s even a place like Green Delights here.’
He mounted the steps of the verandah and walked inside the building. Someone was
lying there on a bed. On the other side of the room were some maids, some of them
sewing, some of them giggling over a game they were playing. Presently the person
on the bed - it was a youth - could he heard to sigh and one of the maids laughingly
inquired what he was sighing for.
‘Aren’t you asleep, Bao-yu? I suppose you are worried about your cousin’s illness
again and imagining all sorts of foolish things about her.’
Bao-yu heard this with some astonishment. He listened while the youth on the bed
replied:
‘I heard Grandmother say that there is another Bao-yu in the capital who is exactly
like me, but I didn’t believe her. I’ve just been having a dream in which I went into a
large garden and met some girls there who called me a “nasty creature” and
wouldn’t have anything to do with me. I managed to find this Bao-yu’s room, but he
was asleep. What I saw was only an empty shell lying there on the bed. I was
wondering where the real person could have got to.’
‘I came here looking for Bao-yu. Are you Bao-yu then?’ Bao-yu could not help
blurting out.
The youth leaped down from the bed and seized Bao-yu by the hands:
‘So you are Bao-yu, and this isn’t a dream after all?’
‘Of course it isn’t a dream,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It couldn’t be more real!’
Just then someone arrived with a summons:
‘The Master wants to see Bao-yu.’
For a moment the two Bao-yus were stunned; and then one Bao-yu hurried off and
the other Bao-yu was left calling after him:
‘Come back, Bao-yu! Come back, Bao-yu!’
Aroma heard him calling his own name in his sleep and shook him awake.
‘Where’s Bao-yu?’ she asked him jokingly.
Though awake, Bao-yu had not yet regained consciousness of his surroundings. He
pointed to the doorway:
‘He’s only just left. He can’t have got very far.’
‘You’re still dreaming,’ Aroma said, amused. ‘Rub your eyes and have another look.
That’s the mirror. You’re looking at your own reflection in the mirror.’
Bao-yu leaned forward and looked the doorway he had pointed to was his
dressing-mirror. He joined Aroma in laughing at himself.
Seeing him awake, maids were already at hand with a spittoon and a cup of strong
tea for him to rinse his mouth with. Musk recalled Grandmother Jia’s strictures
against young people having too many mirrors around them.
‘She says that when you’re young your soul isn’t fully formed yet, and if you’re
reflected in mirrors too often, it can give your soul a shock which causes you to have
bad dreams. Fancy putting your bed right in front of that great mirror! It’s all right as
long as it’s kept covered, but sometimes when you’ve been out to the front,
especially in hot weather when you’re feeling tired, they forget to cover it. That’s
what must have happened just now. And you must have been looking at yourself in it
before you dropped off to sleep. That would be a sure way of bringing on a bad
dream. And it would explain why you were calling your own name out in your sleep.
Let’s move this bed inside, away from the mirror, for goodness sake!’
Just then a message arrived for Bao-yu from Lady Wang saying that she wanted to
see him.
But as to what it was she wanted to see him about: that will be revealed in the
chapter which follows.
CHAPTER 57

Nightingale tests Jade Boy with a startling message
And Aunt Xue comforts Frowner with
words of loving kindness



Obedient to the summons, Bao-yu hurried from the Garden and over to his mother’s
apartment. It appeared that she was about to pay a call on Lady Zhen and wanted to
take him with her. Bao-yu was delighted and hurried back again to get changed.
The Zhens’ town house was very much like the Ning and Rong establishments - if
anything, a shade more opulent. In answer to Bao-yu’s questioning, Lady Zhen
assured him that there was indeed a Bao-yu in Nanking. She kept the two of them to
dinner and they stayed there for the rest of the day. Bao-yu was at last convinced.
As soon as they got back in the evening, Lady Wang made arrangements for
entertaining Lady Zhen. A first-class dinner was ordered, a well-known troupe of
adult players engaged, and Lady Zhen and her daughter were invited to come over
next day. The day after that mother and daughter left town. They had no time for
farewells: Sir Zhen had been ordered back to his post.
It was on the day of their departure that Bao-yu, after visiting Xiang-yun and finding
that she was distinctly on the mend, went over to see how Dai-yu was getting on,
only to be told that she was taking her afternoon nap. Nightingale chanced to be
sitting outside in the covered walk doing some sewing, so, not wishing to disturb
Dai-yu, he went over to talk to Nightingale instead.
‘How was she last night? Is her cough any better?’
‘Yes, a bit better,’ said Nightingale.
‘Thank the Lord for that!’ said Bao-yu fervently. ‘If only she could shake it off
altogether!’
Nightingale looked up at him with amusement:
‘It’s not often we hear you calling on the Lord.’
Bao-yu returned her smile:
‘Any doctor will do in an emergency.’
His eye took in her costume as he said this: a cotton-padded dress of thin
black-and-white material with only a lined black satin waistcoat over the top of it. He
reached out his hand to feel it.
‘What you’re wearing is much too thin for this time of year. You’re sitting in a
draught here as well. If you go sick too, things here will be in a pretty pickle!’
‘Look,’ said Nightingale sharply, ‘let’s just talk to each other in future, shall we,
without any of this pawing about? Now that we’re all beginning to grow up, it creates
such a bad impression. However much that horrible lot over there say things about
you behind your back, you still carry on the same as when you were little. It won’t do.
Miss Lin has warned us time and again about getting into conversations with you.
Look at the way she behaves towards you herself nowadays: she can’t keep far
enough away from you.’
She rose to her feet as she said this and moved, with her sewing, into the house.
The effect of this rebuff on Bao-yu’s feelings was as if a bowl of icy water had been
emptied over him. For some moments he was stunned and stood gazing stupidly at
the clump of bamboos that were growing in front of him; then, as he became
gradually aware that Mamma Zhu, to whose expert care they had been entrusted,
was rooting about in their midst, he took himself off, but still in a daze, and scarcely
aware what he was doing. Presently he sat down on a rock somewhere to think.
Tears rolled down his cheeks, but he did not feel them. For an hour or more he
continued to sit there motionless, turning the same question, ‘What am I to do?’,
over and over in his mind, but never reaching a con?clusion.
Snowgoose, sent on an errand to fetch ginseng from Lady Wang’s, passed by him on
her way back. As she glanced sideways from the path, she saw a figure sitting
motionless on a rock underneath a peach-tree, chin cupped in hand and evidently
lost in thought, which she recognized, with some surprise, as Bao-yu.
‘It’s ever so cold,’ she thought: ‘what can he be doing, all on his own out here?
They say that sickly people are specially liable to catch things in spring. Perhaps he’s
gone mental.’
She went over to where he was sitting and, squatting down in front of him, peered
smilingly into his face.
‘What are you doing out here?’
Bao-yu noticed her with a start.
‘Why do you come up to me like this? You’re a girl, aren’t you? She’s told you all
not to have anything to do with me, for fear of creating a scandal; so why do you still
come up to me? If we’re seen here talking together) there’ll only be more gossip. Go
back home!’
Snowgoose assumed that Dai-yu had been upsetting him and continued on her way.
When she got back to the Naiad’s House, Dai-yu was still asleep, so she gave the
ginseng to Nightingale.
‘What was Her Ladyship doing?’ Nightingale asked her.
‘She was having an afternoon nap, too. That’s why I was so long. I’ll tell you
something that will make you laugh, Night. While I was sitting in the servants’ room
talking to Silver and waiting for Her Ladyship to get up, who should look in but Mrs
Zhao, and beckoned me over to her. And do you know what she wanted? They’re
burying her brother tomorrow and she’s got leave from Her Ladyship to go there for
the wake. Young Fortune’s going with her, and she said Fortune hasn’t got anything
to wear, would I please lend her my pale-blue dress? Well, I thought to myself,
Fortune’s got just as many dresses as I have; the only reason she wants to borrow
some?one else’s is because she’s too mean to let her wear her own there and risk
getting it dirtied. I wouldn’t mind lending it to her - even if she dirtied it, it wouldn’t
matter all that much - but what has she ever done for us? So I said, “Miss Lin told me
to hand all my clothes and jewellery to Nightingale to look after. I should have to see
Nightingale about it first, and I should have to tell Miss Lin. It might take rather a long
time. I might not be able to get it to you before you go,” I said. “Perhaps it would be
safer to borrow someone else’s.”‘
Nightingale laughed.
‘You’re an artful little minx, aren’t you? You don’t wantto lend her your dress, but
you take very good care that it’s me and Miss Lin that get blamed for refusing it, and
not you. Is Mrs Zhao going now, then, or first thing tomorrow?’
‘Now,’ said Snowgoose. ‘She’s probably already left.’
Nightingale nodded.
‘It looks as if Miss Lin’s still asleep,’ said Snowgoose. ‘If it wasn’t her, I wonder who
it was that made Bao-yu so upset. He was sitting Out there in the Garden crying.’
‘Oh?’ said Nightingale sharply. ‘Where?’
‘Under that peach-tree behind Drenched Blossoms Pavi?lion.’
Nightingale hurriedly put down her sewing and stood up. ‘You take over in case she
calls. If she wants me, tell her I’ll be back directly.’
She sped off to look for Bao-yu. There was a reassuring smile on her face as she came
up to him.
‘That was only a harmless little remark I made, and it was only for your own and
everyone else’s good. Why did you need to get in such a passion and go rushing off to
sit in the wind here and cry? Suppose you were to get ill as a result of this.’
Immediately Bao-yu was his smiling self once more:
‘I wasn’t in a passion. I thought what you said was very reasonable. What upset me
was the thought that if you felt that way, then other people must feel that way too, in
which case soon everyone would stop having anything to do with me.’
Nightingale sat down companionably at his side.
‘A short while ago you moved away from me when I was standing opposite you,’
said Bao-yu. ‘Now, apparently, it is all right to sit close beside me.’
‘I suppose you’ve forgotten the time when you and Miss Lin were talking together
and Mrs Zhao burst in on you,’ said Nightingale. ‘That was what made me careful.
Now I’ve just heard that she’s away, so it’s quite safe. Incidentally, there’s something
about that occasion I’ve always wanted to ask you. You were about to say something
about bird’s nest when she came in but didn’t have a chance to finish; and you’ve
never referred to it since.’
‘Oh, it was nothing important,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It’s just that once you start taking
bird’s nest, you’ve got to keep it up, and it seemed to me that as Cousin Bao is really
here as our guest, it would be rather boorish to keep asking her for more; on the
other hand it would be rather awkward to have to ask Lady Wang for it; so I dropped
a hint to Grandma, and I rather think that she had a word on the subject with Feng.
That’s all I was going to tell Dai when we were interrupted. I’ve since heard that
you’re getting an ounce a day regularly, so there hasn’t seemed any need to mention
it.
‘Oh, so it was you who told her about it,’ said Nightingale. ‘In that case we owe you
our thanks. We couldn’t think what it was that could have suddenly put it into her
head.’
‘She should take it regularly, every day,’ said Bao-yu. ‘If she can keep it up for two
or three years, she should get completely better.’
‘It’s easy enough now,’ said Nightingale, ‘but where will she find the money for it
next year, when she goes home?’
Bao-yu was startled.
‘When who goes home? What home?’
‘When your Cousin Dai goes back to Soochow.’
Bao-yu laughed:
‘You’re joking. Soochow is where her father came from, I know. But the reason we
brought her here in the first place was because when my Aunt Lin died there was no
one to look after her. There wouldn’t be anyone in Soochow for her to go to. You
must be lying.’
‘How arrogant you are I’ said Nightingale scornfully. ‘I suppose you think yours is
the only big family in the world. According to you, I suppose, other people only have
fathers and mothers: they couldn’t possibly have uncles and aunts on their father’s
side like you do. As a matter of fact, when Miss Lin came here it wasn’t because there
weren’t any relations of her father’s that she could have gone to; it was because Her
Old Ladyship was afraid that being so little she might not be as happy with them as
she would with her mother’s folk. But it was only ever her intention to keep her here
for a few years. As soon as she’s old enough to be married, she’ll have to go back to
the Lin family. You could hardly expect a Lin family girl to spend the rest of her days
among Jias, now could you? The Lins may be too poor to afford a square meal, but
they are people of education. They’d never sink so low as to hand over responsibility
for one of their own number to their marriage-kin. Next year - next spring at the
earliest, but certainly not later than next autumn - either your family will send her
back to them or the Lins themselves will come here to fetch her. Miss Lin was talking
to me about it only the other night. She said I was to ask you to get together all the
little presents she’s ever given you and send them back to her, and she’ll do the same
with yours.’
To Bao-yu these words were like a thunderclap exploding immediately overhead.
Nightingale waited to see how he would reply, but he made no sound. Growing at
last im?patient, she was about to speak to him again when Skybright appeared. She
had been looking for him everywhere, she said. He was wanted by his grandmother.
‘He’s been here all this time talking about Miss Lin’s ill-ness,’ said Nightingale. ‘I
keep telling him how she is, but he won’t believe me. If you want him to go with you,
you’ll have to take hold of him and make him go.’
She left then, without waiting to see more.
Skybright noticed Bao-yu’s vacant expression. His forehead was beaded with sweat
and there was a red, inflamed look about his face. She seized him by the hand and
hurried him back to Green Delights.
Aroma was naturally alarmed to see Bao-yu come back in such a state, but attributed
it to the weather: it was an in-clement spring and he had gone out while overheated
and exposed himself to the wind. But it soon became ap?parent that feverishness
was the least serious of his symp?toms. His eyes had a fixed and glassy stare, a little
trickle of saliva ran from each corner of his mouth, and he seemed to have lost all
consciousness of what he was doing: when they brought him a pillow he lay down;
when they pulled him by the hand he sat up again; when they handed him a cup of
tea he drank it; but all with the mechanical movements of an automaton. The maids,
when they saw this, were in a panic; but not daring to report yet to Grandmother Jia,
they first sent for Nannie Li to tell them what was wrong.
Nannie Li came promptly. Before she did anything else, she spent a good long while
simply observing him. Then she asked him a few questions, but he made no reply.
Then she took his wrist in her hand and felt his pulse. Finally, taking the raphe of his
lip between her thumb and finger, she pinched it a couple of times, so hard that a
deep imprint was made by her nails: yet he seemed to feel nothing.
‘Lord a mercy!’ cried the old woman in a pathetic voice, and clinging to his body,
she set up a howl and wept. Aroma, beside herself with anxiety, tugged imploringly
at her sleeve:
‘Nannie, Nannie, have another look at him and tell us how serious it is, so that we
know what to say to Their Ladyships. Don’t just cry!’
Nannie Li hammered the bed with her fists:
‘It’s all up with him, I tell you. All the heartache I’ve had on account of him was
wasted.’
Aroma and the girls who, whatever else they might think of Nannie Li, respected her
age and experience, assumed that she must know what she was talking about and all
began crying too.
Skybright now told Aroma the circumstances in which she had found Bao-yu.
Without a moment’s hesitation Aroma flew over to the Naiad’s House, arriving just
as Nightingale was giving Dai-yu her medicine. Wasting no time on civility, she stalked
straight up to Nightingale and confronted her there and then.
‘What did you say just now to our Bao-yu? Just go and take a look at him, will you,
then go and tell Her Old Lady ship, because I won’t be responsible.’
She concluded by sitting down rudely in a chair.
The sight of Aroma, with her angry, tear-stained face, behaving in a way that was so
utterly uncharacteristic of her, filled Dai-yu with alarm.
‘What is it?’
Aroma made an effort to control herself and answered tearfully:
‘I don’t know what Her Ladyship here can have said to him, but that simpleton of
ours just stares into space without speaking, his hands and feet are icy-cold, and
when Nannie Li pinches him, he doesn’t seem to feel anything. He looked half dead
when I left. Even Nannie Li said it was all up with him. She’s over there wailing for
him now. He may be already dead for all I know.’
To Dai-yu, as to the girls, Nannie Li, for all her failings, was an old woman whose
words carried the weight of experience. If she said it was all up with Bao-yu, it must
be all up with him. There was a horrible sickening sound as she vomited up the
medicine she had just taken, followed by a dreadful paroxysm of silent coughing that
seemed to rack every nerve and fibre of her body. She coughed until her face was
scarlet and her hair was in disorder, until her eyes bulged and the veins stood out on
her forehead, coughed until she was so breathless that she was unable to lift her face
up from the bed. Nightingale at once began thumping her, but Dai-yu raised herself
with an effort from the pillow and, after struggling for some moments to regain her
breath, pushed her away:
‘Don’t do that. Get a rope and strangle me - that would be kinder!’
‘But I didn’t say anything,’ Nightingale protested. ‘I was only joking. He must have
taken me seriously.’
‘Surely you know better by now than to joke with him?’ said Aroma. ‘He’s such a
fool, he always takes everything seriously.’
‘Whatever it was you said to him,’ said Dai-yu, ‘you’d better go over there straight
away and unsay it. That might bring him back to his senses.’
Nightingale climbed hurriedly off the bed and accompanied Aroma to Green Delights.
Unfortunately Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang were also there when they arrived. At
the sight of Nightingale, Grandmother Jia’s eyes flashed angrily.
‘Wicked creature! What did you say to him?’
‘I didn’t say anything,’ said Nightingale. ‘I was only pulling his leg.’
There was a sudden ‘Aiya!’ from the bed. It was Bao-yu, who had just caught sight of
Nightingale and who now, to everyone’s relief, burst into tears.
Grandmother Jia seized hold of Nightingale and thrust her towards him. She
supposed that Nightingale had offended Bao-yu in some way and that he would find
relief in beating her. To her surprise, instead of doing any such thing, he clung to her
imploringly:
‘If you’re going, take me with you!’
No one could make head or tall of this until Nightingale had been questioned and
explained to them the nature of her hoax.
‘So that’s all it was!’ said Grandmother Jia in tears. ‘And I was thinking it must be
something serious!’ She chided Nightingale, but less unkindly now: ‘You’re normally
such a sensible girl. Surely you know he’s inclined to be a bit simple at times? What
on earth possessed you to tease him like that?’
Aunt Xue urged a less serious view of Bao-yu’s derangement:
‘It’s true that he is a simple-hearted child; but his Cousin Lin came here when they
were both little and they have grown up together and are closer to each other than
any of the other children. I think you would expect him to be upset, suddenly out of
the blue like that being told that she was going away. Never mind a simple-hearted
child, I should think even a sophisticated grown-up would be! This isn’t a serious
illness, Lady Jia. I’m sure you and my sister have no reason to feel worried. A dose or
two of medicine and he’ll be perfectly all right again.’
Just at that moment the wives of Lin Zhi-xiab and Lai Da were announced, ‘come to
see how the young master was’.
‘How thoughtful of them!’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Tell them to come in.
But at the sound of the name ‘Lin’ Bao-yu began threshing about wildly on the bed,
calling out that the Lins had come to fetch Dai-yu and insisting that they should be
sent away.
‘Yes, send them away,’ said Grandmother Jia, while at the same time she did her
best to soothe him: ‘There, there, there. That wasn’t anyone from the Lin family. The
Lins all died out long ago. There aren’t any of them left to fetch her. Don’t worry!’
‘I don’t care who it was,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I don’t want any Lins here, apart from Cousin
Lin.’
‘There aren’t any Lins here,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘All the Lins in this place have
been sent away.’
   She turned to the servants:
   ‘In future Lin Zhi-xlao’s wife is not to be allowed inside the Garden. And I don’t
want the word “Lin” to pass your lips even. Is that clearly understood, everyone?’
   ‘Yes, madam,’ the servants replied in chorus, not daring to laugh.
   Presently Bao-yu’s eye chanced to light on a little metal self-propelling boat - a
West Ocean toy - which stood on one of the alcove shelves in the carved partition.
Immediately he became excited again.
   ‘Look!’ he said, pointing, ‘the ship that’s come to fetch her - that’s where they’ve
docked it, over there.’
   At a hurried order from his grandmother, Aroma took it down from the shelf. He
held his hand out to receive it, and as soon as it was in his possession, hid it under
the quilt, chuckling with satisfaction as he did so:
   ‘They won’t get away now!’
   All this time he continued to hold tightly on to Nightingale with his other hand.
   The doctor’s arrival was announced and Grandmother Jia gave orders that he
should be brought in immediately. Lady Wang, Aunt Xue and the girls withdrew into
the inner room. Grandmother Jia herself continued to sit beside Bao-yu on the edge
of the bed. As her attendants also remained, there were a good many people in the
room when the doctor entered. It was Dr Wang. He paid his respects to the old lady
before proceeding to take Bao-yu’s pulse, mystified by the presence of a shame-faced
Nightingale, who, unable to leave Bao-yu’s side, could only stand there and hang her
head.
   After feeling the pulse for a while, Dr Wang rose to his feet.
   ‘The young gentleman is suffering from a delirium caused by a phlegmatic
occlusion of the cardiac orifices. The ancients recognized three main types of this
form of dementia: in the first type the delirium is associated with an anaemic
deficiency, when the body is failing to absorb its nourishment; in the second, it is
brought on by some violent emotional disturbance, such as anger; in the third, the
occlusion occurs as a result of shock. This is a delirium of the third type. In this type,
fortunately, the occlusion is only a temporary one, so it is less serious than the other
two.’
‘Just tell us whether it’s dangerous or not,’ said Grand mother Jia. ‘We’re not asking
you for a treatise on medicine.’
Dr Wang laughed deprecatingly and bowed:
‘He’ll be all right.’
‘Will he really be all right?’
‘Unquestionably,’ said the doctor. ‘I give you my word for it.
‘Very well,’ said Grandmother Jia. ‘Then perhaps you will go outside now and write
your prescription. If he recovers, I promise you a handsome reward, and Bao-yu
himself shall bring it to you and kotow to you when he brings it. But if he doesn’t get
better, I shall have the main hall of the College of Physicians pulled down about your
ears!’
‘How kind! How kind!’ The doctor, bowing and smiling at the prospect of a
‘handsome reward’ and Bao-yu kotowing at his feet, could not have heard the threat
which followed, for he continued to say ‘How kind!’ after it had been uttered and left
the room pursued by a wave of laughter.
The medicine he prescribed was soon concocted and Bao-yu did, after taking it,
become a good deal calmer. But he would not release Nightingale.
‘If she goes,’ he said, ‘I shall know that they are leaving for Soochow.’
Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang saw that there was nothing for it but to let
Nightingale stay with him. Amber was sent to look after Dai-yu in her place. Dai-yu’s
other maid, Snowgoose, was kept busy running to and fro for news of Bao-yu’s
condition. By evening this was sufficiently improved for Grandmother Jia and the
other visitors to feel that they could return to their own apartments. They continued
to inquire after him by messenger, however, throughout the course of the night.
Nannie Li came again, bringing Mamma Song and several other old nannies to help
watch over him. Nightingale, Aroma, Skybright and Musk kept up a constant vigil at
his bedside throughout the night. From time to time Bao-yu would drop off, but
invariably he would wake up with a start from some dream and tearfully announce to
them either that Dai-yu had already gone or that people had come to take her away.
Each time this happened Nightingale was the only one who could calm him.
Grandmother Jia had sent over various nostrums -pills and powders she had heard
recommended as sovereign specifics in cases of mental disorder - and they used
these to dose him with when he woke up.
Next day, after another dose of Dr Wang’s medicine, Bao-yu was distinctly better. His
mind was clear now, but because he did not wish to lose Nightingale yet, he
pretended that it was still affected. Nightingale regretted what she had done and
bore the antics of this pseudo-madman and the weariness of waiting on him both
night and day with uncomplaining fortitude.
‘It’s only right that you should have to nurse him, seeing that you were the one
who set him off,’ said Aroma, relieved that Bao-yu was only play-acting. ‘You should
have known better. He’s a case, this young master of ours. Tell him the wind’s
blowing on a fine day, and next minute he can hear the rain! Heighho! What he’ll be
like when he’s grown up doesn’t bear thinking of!’
But she did not pursue the subject.
*

Xiang-yun had by now recovered completely and could drop in daily to see how
Bao-yu was progressing. As soon as he seemed normal, she treated them all to an
imitation of his madness. Her mimicry was so droll that even Bao-yu had to laugh,
shamefacedly, into his pillow. He had no recollection of what he had been like when
it all started and now, when they told him, he did not believe them.
Once, when no one was about, he took Nightingale’s hand in his own and drew her
to him.
‘Why did you scare me like that?’
‘I was pulling your leg,’ said Nightingale. ‘It was only a joke, but you took it
seriously.’
‘That was no joke,’ said Bao-yu. ‘It was too well-reasoned.’
Nightingale laughed.
‘I made it all up. There’s no Lin family - leastways, if there is, they’re very, very
distant relations, and not in Soochow, either, but scattered all over the place, in
different provinces. And even if one of them did come to take her away, Her Old
Ladyship would never let her go.’
‘I wouldn’t, even if she did,’ said Bao-yu.
‘I wonder,’ said Nightingale. ‘I think you’re only saying that. You’re not a child any
longer now. You’re already betrothed. Another two or three years, when you’re
married, you won’t have time for anyone else.’
Bao-yu heard her with astonishment.
‘Betrothed? To whom?’
Just before New Year I heard Her Old Ladyship say that she was betrothing you to
Miss Qin. That’s why she makes so much of her, isn’t it?’
Bao-yu burst out laughing.
‘Everyone calls me a simpleton, but you’re an even bigger simpleton than I am.
That was only a joke. Qin’s already betrothed to Academician Mei’s son. Do you think
I would have taken it so calmly if I had been betrothed to her? Don’t you remember
the scene we had last time, when I swore all those oaths and tried to break this
beastly thing’ - he pointed to his jade - ‘and you had such a job trying to stop me?
What are you trying to do? Start me off again?’
He ground his teeth.
‘If only I could die this minute and my heart burst out of my body so that you could
see how true it is! After that I shouldn’t care if all of me - flesh, blood and bones -
was burned to ashes, and the ashes turned to smoke, and the smoke blown by the
winds into every corner of the earth!’
Big tears rolled down his cheeks. Nightingale covered his mouth up in alarm; then, as
she wiped his eyes for him, she spoke to him soothingly as to a child:
‘There, there. There’s no need to get so worked up about it. I’m the one who needs
to worry. That’s why I said those things: to test you.’
‘You?’ said Bao-yu in surprise. ‘What have you got to be worried about?’
‘You know I never belonged to the Lin family, don’t you,’ said Nightingale. ‘I was
originally one of Her Old Ladyship’s servants, like Faithful and your Aroma. I was
transferred to Miss Lin, but as it turned out I got on very well with her -ten times
better, as a matter of fact, than the maid she brought with her from Yangchow - and
since then we’ve become inseparable. Lately I’ve been worried by the thought that
she might have to leave here - in which case, of course, I should want to go with her.
But all my family is here. If I didn’t go with her, it would seem like a betrayal after
what we’ve been to each other all these years. On the other hand if I did go, it would
mean leaving my family behind. I wasn’t sure about how serious you were in wanting
her to stay. That’s why I made those things up. I wanted to test you. I never imagined
you were going to make such an uproar, or I wouldn’t have said them.’
‘So that’s what was worrying you!’ said Bao-yu, smiling. ‘Well, you are a simpleton.
Please don’t worry about that any more. Let me try to put it for you in a nutshell. In
life we shall live together; in death we shall mingle our dust. How will that do?’
Nightingale said nothing, but appeared to be thinking. One of the old women came in
to announce that Jia Huan and Jia Lan had come to inquire after Bao-yu’s health.
‘Tell them it’s very kind of them,’ said Bao-yu, ‘but not to come in here, because
I’ve only just gone to sleep.’
‘Very good,’ said the old woman, and went off to relay the message.
‘Now that you’re better,’ said Nightingale, ‘you ought to let me go back to see how
my other invalid is getting on.’
‘Yes, you’re right,’ said Bao-yu. ‘I was meaning to tell you last night that you could
go back, but I forgot. I am completely better now. You can go back straight away.
Nightingale began tying up her bedding and getting her toilet things together.
‘I notice you’ve got several mirrors in your vanity box,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Why don’t you
give me that little one with the pattern of caltrops on it as a keepsake? I can keep it
by my pillow to use when I’m in bed, and it will be handy to take with me when I go
out.’
Nightingale gave him the mirror, then, having first arranged for someone to carry
over her things, took leave of the other maids and returned on her own to the
Naiad’s House.
During the past few days Dai-yu’s anxiety for Bao-yu had led to a relapse and had
been the occasion of several fits of weeping. On inquiring nervously why Nightingale
had returned, she was relieved to hear that it was because Bao-yu was better. As
Amber’s services were now no longer needed, she sent her back to Grandmother Jia.
That night, when all the others had gone to bed and she had undressed and was lying
not far off from her mistress, Nightingale addressed her, in guarded undertone, on
the subject of Bao-yu’s intentions.
‘Bao-yu really is a simple soul. Do you know what made him ill? It was because he
heard that we were going away.’
Dai-yu said nothing. After waiting in vain for a reply, Nightingale went on as if
speaking to herself.
‘Much better stay where we are. You couldn’t ask for a better family than this. And
the two of you have grown up together and know each other’s likes and dislikes.
Where else would you find someone who understood you so well?’
Dai-yu snorted at her disgustedly.
‘Aren’t you tired after all your exertions during these last few days? I can’t
understand why, instead of chattering away to yourself, you don’t take this
opportunity to get a bit of rest.’
‘It isn’t lust chatter,’ said Nightingale. ‘I’m concerned about your future, Miss. It’s
been worrying me for years. You’ve no father or mother or brothers: there’s no one
else who will concern themselves about it. The important thing is to get it all
properly settled while Her Old Ladyship is still well and in her right mind. You know
what they say: “Good health in the old is like warm weather in winter: you can’t
depend on it.” If anything were suddenly to happen to her, the chance of getting
someone you really liked would have passed you by. No doubt they would do their
best to marry you to some?one of good family, but look how many of these young
aristocrats keep concubines, and how changeable they are in their affections. Some
of them if they were married to the Queen of Heaven would tire of her in a week.
And neglect is not the worst part of it; often there are hard words and harsh
treatment to follow. When that happens, if the wife has a powerful family to stick up
for her, it isn’t so bad; but what about someone in your position? As long as Her Old
Ladyship is alive you’ll be all right, but once she’s gone, you’ll be at everyone’s mercy.
That’s why I say we’ve got to make our minds up.

Easier a golden hoard to win
Than find one understanding heart.

You’re a clever young lady. I’m sure you must know that saying.’
‘This girl’s gone out of her mind,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Just these few days away and she’s
come back completely altered. I shall have to tell Her Old Ladyship about this
tomorrow and get her to take you back. I’m afraid you can’t stay with me any longer.’
‘I meant no harm,’ said Nightingale. ‘I’ve only told you to think about it; I haven’t
asked you to do anything wicked. Why should you tell Her Old Ladyship? It’ll only get
me into trouble, and what good will that do you?’
She said no more, and presently went to sleep.
Not so Dai-yu. However she might have concealed the fact from Nightingale, she was
deeply affected by what the maid had said, and while Nightingale slept beside her,
she lay awake weeping through the greater part of the night. The darkness was
beginning to lighten when she finally dropped off to sleep. Washing that morning
required an effort. Not long after she had finished her bird’s nest syrup, Grandmother
Jia came in person to see her and waxed eloquent on the importance of getting well.

*

It was Aunt Xue’s birthday and everyone from Grandmother Jia downwards sent her
a present. Dai-yu looked out two little articles of her own embroidering to send her.
Aunt Xue hired a troupe of child actors and threw a birthday party which everyone
except Bao-yu and Dai-yu attended. Grandmother Jia took everyone to call on them
both on her way hack from it.
Next day there was another party for the employees of the Xue family at which Xue
Ke acted as host on his aunt’s behalf. There were more festivities on the day which
followed. Altogether three or four days were spent just in celebrating the one
birthday.
Aunt Xue was very impressed with what she had seen of Xing Xiu-yan. She was such a
refined, serious girl, in spite of her unfortunate upbringing: the very model of ‘virtue
in homespun and a wooden hairpin’. Aunt Xue had thought of her as a possible
daughter-in-law, but when she reflected on the lawless nature of her son, it seemed a
pity that so nice a girl should be thrown away on him. She was still trying to make her
mind up about this when suddenly it occurred to her that Xue Ke was not yet
betrothed and that he and Xiu?-yan would make an ideal couple. She decided to ask
Xi-feng for her advice. Xi-feng was enthusiastic.
‘But you know how difficult Lady Xing can be,’ she said. ‘Why don’t you leave it to
me, Auntie? Let me deal with it in my own time.’
She found her opportunity of broaching the subject when Grandmother Jia next
came to call on her.
‘There’s something my Aunt Xue wants you to do for her, Grannie, but she’s a little
bit shy of asking.’
‘Oh? What’s that?’ said Grandmother Jia.
She laughed when Xi-feng explained.
‘Good gracious, that’s nothing to be shy about! It’s a splendid idea. Let me have a
talk with your mother-in-law about this. She won’t refuse, I promise you.’
As soon as she was back in her own apartment, she summoned Lady Xing and
proposed the match to her, urging its suitability in forceful terms.
Lady Xing did some rapid thinking: the Xue family were of respectable origins; they
were immensely rich; Xue Ke was a good-looking boy; and Grandmother Jia was
making herself responsible for the match. Confident that she would be able to turn it
to her own advantage, she assented, to Grandmother Jia’s intense satisfaction,
without more ado. The presence of Aunt Xue was now requested and the
self-abasing civilities customary on these occasions exchanged between her and Lady
Xing. When these had somewhat abated, Lady Xing sent someone to inform Xing
Xiu-yan’s parents, Xing De-?quan and his wife, of the Xue family’s proposal. Living as
they now did on Lady Xing’s charity, they were scarcely in a position to refuse even if
they wanted to, and the messenger was soon back again reporting their prompt and
enthusiastic acceptance.
‘I love meddling in other people’s affairs,’ said Grandmother Jia jovially. ‘I seem to
have meddled successfully in this one. I hope I am going to be paid something for my
services.’
‘Of course,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘The only difficulty will be knowing how much to give
you. What shall we say? Ten thousand taels? Probably you would regard that as too
little! What we really need is a sponsor to settle these matters for us.’
‘We may be short of manpower in this family,’ said Grandmother Jia, ‘but I dare say
we could rustle up a couple of cripples for you!’
She sent someone to fetch You-shi and her daughter-in-law from Ning-guo House. As
soon as they arrived, she explained why she had invited them, whereupon they
turned to the other two ladies and offered them their congratulations.
‘Now,’ said Grandmother Jia when they had finished, ‘you know our way of doing
things in this family, don’t you - you know we never haggle about bride-prices and
“face” and that sort of thing? We want you to act as a third party and settle this for
us. What we want is a settlement that is not too lavish and yet not too economical:
something between the two. And when you’ve worked out what each of the parties
should contribute, come and tell me what you have decided.’
You-shi promptly agreed to do this. Aunt Xue, delighted that everything had gone off
so well, hurried home and at once had a formal invitation to act as marriage-sponsor
drawn up and sent over to Ning-guo House to confirm the arrangement.
You-shi knew Lady Xing too well to want to be mixed up in any affairs - particularly
one of a pecuniary nature - to which she was a party. She had agreed in this instance
only because Grandmother Jia had asked her to and she could not very well refuse. In
the event she simply arranged matters in the way she thought would best please
Lady Xing. Aunt Xue was a very accommodating person and could be relied on to fall
in with almost any terms. But it is not with details such as these that our narrative is
concerned.
Aunt Xue's betrothal of her nephew to Xing Xiu-yan was soon common knowledge
throughout the household. At first Lady Xing wanted to segregate the girl by moving
her in with herself, but Grandmother Jia objected.
'Surely she can stay where she is? She can't see anything of the boy, of course, but
surely there's no harm in her con?tinuing to see Mrs Xue and Bao-chai and little Qin?
They're all females, after all. It will be cosier if they get to know each other better.'
Lady Xing did not renew her offer.
And what of the parties themselves? Xue Ke and Xing Xiu-yan had met briefly on the
journey to the capital and there was no reason to suppose that they were not
extremely pleased with the betrothal. Inevitably Xiu-yan became a little more
withdrawn after it, spending rather less of her time in Bao-chai's and Bao-qin's
company and speaking, when she was in it, rather more sparingly. But this was partly
because Shi Xiang-yun was such a tease. Fortunately she was far too intelligent and
well-bred to indulge in any of that false modesty, so common among girls in her
position, which shows itself in affected simpering and ridiculous grimaces.
Ever since the day they first met, Bao-chai had felt sorry for Xiu-yan. First of all she
was so poor. And then there was her father. Unlike most of the fathers that Bao-chai
knew about - grave gentlemen who had gained wisdom with their years - Xiu-yan's
father was a drunken sot who took little interest in his daughter's welfare. As for Lady
Xing, Bao-chai could see that the affection she showed her niece was simu?lated and
that really she did not care for her in the least. And Ying-chun, whose apartment she
shared, was too docile to assert herself even on her own behalf, let alone anyone
else's.
Since Xiu-yan was too proud to ask for things, this meant that whenever anything
was lacking, even one of the simple necessities of life, she had simply to go with out
it. Knowing this, Bao-chai did all she could to anticipate her wants; but she gave by
stealth, careful lest Lady Xing, who was sensitive to gossip, if to nothing else; should
get to hear of it.
Xiu-yan had learned to cherish Bao-chai as a special friend long before this
magnificent betrothal so wildly beyond her own and everyone else's expectations
and, after it, continued from time to time to confide in her. Bao-chai for her part
continued to treat her as an intimate friend and would use none of the formalities
that are customary between prospective sisters-in-law.
One day, when Bao-chai was on her way to visit Dai-yu, she caught sight of Xiu-yan,
who, as it happened, was also on her way there. Bao-chai smiled and beckoned and
waited for Xiu-yan to catch up with her. The two girls then walked on together until
they came to the rear side of a miniature moun?tain of rock. There, where no prying
eyes could see them, Bao-chai stopped again.
'The weather is still really cold. Why have you changed Out of your winter clothes
already and put on single linings?'
Xiu-yan hung her head and said nothing. Ba-chai guessed at once that she had been
forced to pawn them.
'It must be because you haven't had this month's allowance yet,' she said. 'How could
Cousin Feng be so thoughtless?'
'No,' said Xiu-yan. 'She didn't forget. She paid the allow?ance on time. But Aunt Xing
sent someone to tell me that she thought I didn't really need two taels a month and
that I ought to contribute one of them towards my parents' upkeep. She said that if
there ever was anything I needed, I could always hent it from Cousin Ying's things' -
suppressed emotion was causing her to lapse into her native dialect -'But I ask you,
coz, how could I? Cousin Ying wouldn't mind - she is so meek - and she probably
wouldn't notice, any road. But though she wouldn't say anything, you can be quite
sure that the servants would. The nannies and maids in that apart?ment are such a
prickly lot and so spiteful with their tongues. Although I am living there, I dare not
ask them to do very much for me, and even for what little they do I am expected to
find money to buy them drinks and other little treats with every four or five days.
Even when I was getting two taels it wasn’t enough, and now it’s only one. The only
way of raising money I could think of was by pawning my winter clothes. I got
someone to slip out and do it for me the other day.’
Bao-chai sighed.
‘It’s a pity all the Mei family areaway just now. Academician Mei isn’t due back
from his posting until the year after next. if they were here in town, Bao-qin could
get married straight away and then we could go ahead with your affair and get you
out of this mess. But as things are, your Prospective will never consent to get married
before his sister, so the difficulty remains. I shall have to have a word with Mamma
about this. Obviously you can’t go on as you are. Another year or two like this and I
am afraid you will go into a decline.
‘In future, if those people are nasty to you, you must learn to put up with it. You
mustn’t make yourself ill trying to please them. Perhaps you had better hand over
the whole of your remaining tad to them when it comes: see if that will keep them
quiet. But don’t go treating them any more, whatever you do. Never mind the
spiteful things they say to you. If it gets too bad, you can always walk away. And if
you are short of anything, don’t behave like a little frightened mouse; ask me straight
out for it, without delay. I say this not because we are future sisters-in-law but
because we are friends. We are friends, aren’t we, and have been ever since you
came? If you are afraid of gossip, don’t come yourself when you want something,
send your maid for it, then no one will know.’
Xiu-yan hung her head and the reply she made was scarcely audible. In order to
change the subject, Bao-chai pointed to a green jade girdle-ring that was hanging
from her waist.
‘Who gave you that?’
‘Cousin Tan,’ said Xiu-yan.
Bao-chai nodded.
‘She must have noticed that all the other girls were wearing one of these things
and wanted to spare you the embarrass?ment of being the only one without. It is
typical of her to be so thoughtful. However, I think you ought to realize that these
sort of gewgaws are really for the daughters of mandarins and noblemen. Look at me:
you don’t see any jewellery on me. A few years ago, it’s true, I would have been
smothered with it; but I know now that we are less well off than we used to be, and
have given up wearing it as a means of economizing. No doubt when you marry you
will be provided with a whole trunkful of this stuff, In the meantime, though, we
don’t need to compete with the others in finery, you and I. As long as we are honest
and remain true to ourselves, it doesn’t matter that we cannot equal them in
appearance.’
Xiu-yan smiled.
‘In that case, I shall go back and take it off,’ she said.
‘Don’t be so precipitate,’ said Bao-chai. ‘She meant it as a kindness. If she sees you
not wearing it, she will wonder why. I spoke only in general terms, for your future
guidance.’
Xiu-yan murmured her assent.
‘Where are you going now, coz?’ she asked Bao-chai.
‘To the Naiad’s House,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Why don’t you go back now and get your
maid to bring me that pawn ticket? I’ll send someone out on the quiet to redeem the
things for you and get them round to you in the evening without anyone knowing, so
that you can begin wearing them again as soon as possible. We don’t want you
catching cold in this wind, do we? Oh, there’s just one other thing: where did you
pawn them?’
‘I think it’s called the “Reliant”,’ said Xiu-yan. ‘It’s in Drum Tower Street West.’
Bao-chai laughed.
‘Well, at least they’ve stayed in the family. If the assistants realized where they had
come from, they must have thought they were receiving an advance instalment of
your trousseau!’
Xiu-yan coloured, realizing that the ‘Reliant’ must be one of the Xue family’s
businesses. She did not say anything, however, but with a little laugh hurried back to
look for the pawn ticket.
Bao-chai continued on her way to the Naiad’s House. She arrived to find her mother
already ensconced and in the midst of conversation with Dai-yu.
‘Mamma, what a surprise! When did you arrive?’
‘I’ve been so busy during these last few days that I haven’t had time to see her or
Bao-yu. Today I decided to see both of them, but both of them seem to be better.’
Dai-yu urged Bao-chai to be seated.
‘The world’s affairs are very mysterious,’ she said, by way of bringing her into the
conversation. ‘Who would ever have thought that your mother and Aunt Xing would
end up as commeres?’
‘My child,’ said Aunt Xue, ‘you are too young to understand these things. Old folk
talk about “the unseen thread that binds”. They say that marriages are decided by an
Old Man Under the Moon who joins future couples together by tying them round the
ankles with a scarlet thread, and that once he’s done that, it doesn’t matter how far
apart they are, even if there are oceans between them, sooner or later something
will happen to bring them together and they will end up husband and wife. These
things are quite unpredictable. Sometimes there will be two young people whose
parents on both sides are favourable to their union, who have lived years together in
the same place, and who take it as a foregone conclusion that they are going to
marry, yet if the Old Man Under the Moon hasn’t tied them with his scarlet thread,
then in spite of everything, they never will. Take you two girls, now: we don’t know
whether at this moment the two young men you will marry are right here under our
noses or somewhere “south of the mountains and north of the sea”!’
‘Mamma!’ said Bao-chai, burying her head in her mother’s dress, ‘how you do
always drag one in when you get talking!’
‘Look at her!’ said Dai-yu, mockingly. ‘What a great baby! She’s ever so poised and
grown-up when you aren’t here, Auntie. It’s only when she’s with you that she puts
on this little girl act.’
Aunt Xue stroked the recumbent head, still buried in her lap, and sighed indulgently.
‘I suppose it’s a bit like Cousin Feng and your grandmother. Chai can be perfectly
serious with me when things need dis?cussing, but at the same time she knows the
little ways of cheering me up - she knows that when she becomes my little girl again,
it helps me forget my troubles.’
It was Dai-yu’s turn to sigh now. A tear rolled down each cheek.
‘I don’t know why she has to do it here though unless she wants to rub in the fact
that I haven’t got a mother.’
‘Oh Mamma, just listen to that!’ said Bao-chai. ‘Who’s putting on a little girl act
now?’
‘You mustn’t blame her for being upset,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘Poor child! She has no
one.’
She stroked Dai-yu’s hair and tried to comfort her.
‘Don’t cry, my dear. You mustn’t be upset because I make a fuss of your cousin. I’m
as fond of you, you know- perhaps even more so. Although Chai has no father, she
has got me and Pan so you see I know that you have the greater need. She knows
how fond I am of you, because I am always telling her. The only reason I don’t show it
more is because there are a lot of people in this household who are always ready to
put a false construction on things. If they saw me being nice to you, they would say
that I did it not for the very obvious reason that everything about you cries out to be
loved and that one can hardly help loving you, but because I saw how much your
grandmother loves you and wanted to curry favour with her.’
‘You say you love me as much as Chai,’ said Dai-yu. ‘Let me be your god-daughter
then. Don’t refuse, Auntie, or I shall think you don’t really mean it.
‘If you will have me for your godmother, I should like nothing better.’
‘Out of the question,’ said Bao-chai flatly.
‘But why?’ said Dai-yu.
Bao-chai smiled mischievously:
‘Tell me, why do you think Cousin Xing was betrothed to my Cousin Ke? Why wasn’t
she betrothed to my brother, who is Cousin Ke’s senior and who still hasn’t got a
be?trothed?’
‘I suppose because your brother is away,’ said Dai-yu, ‘or perhaps their horoscopes
are incompatible.’
‘No,’ said Bao-chai, ‘that’s not the reason. It’s because someone has already been
chosen for my brother. We are only waiting for him to come home to make it public. I
don’t need to name names. If I tell you that you can’t possibly become Mamma’s
god-daughter, you ought to be able to work it out for yourself.’
She winked at her mother and broke into a laugh.
This time it was Dai-yu who buried her face in Aunt Xue’s bosom.
‘Beat her, Auntie, beat her - I insist!’
Aunt Xue hugged her niece, laughing:
‘You mustn’t believe what she says. She’s only teasing.’
‘No, seriously, Mamma,’ said Bao-chai, ‘why don’t you ask Lady Jia some time if you
can have Cousin Lin for your daughter-in-law? You will never find a better one
elsewhere.’
Dai-yu threw herself on Bao-chai and made as if to scratch her:
‘Have you gone quite mad?’
Aunt Xue laughingly held them apart.
‘If I thought that your brother was not good enough for Xiu-yan - which is why I
betrothed her to your cousin Ke -I certainly wouldn’t inflict him on this child here.
Not so long ago Lady Jia was asking me about Bao-qin as a possible match for Bao-yu,
but I had to tell her that Bao-qin was already betrothed - not that otherwise it
wouldn’t have been a very good match. The other day, when we’d finished discussing
Ke and Xiu-yan’s betrothal, she began teasing me about it. “Last time, when I wanted
one of her girls,” she said, “I couldn’t have her; and now here she is snapping up one
of ours!” She was only joking, of course, but I could see that she was thinking about
Bao-yu still and half inviting me to make a suggestion. I rather wish now that I had.
She is so concerned about him, and he is such a peculiar boy. You can’t see him
getting on with some girl chosen for him from outside. I think much the most
satisfactory arrangement would be to betroth him to your Cousin Lin here.’
Dai-yu, who up to this moment had been listening open-mouthed, turned scarlet at
the mention of her own name and with a cry of rage threw herself again on Bao-chai.
‘I’ll kill you! You deliberately led Auntie up to this.’
‘How ridiculous!’ said Bao-chai, laughing. ‘It’s Mamma who said it, not I. What are
you hitting me for?’
Already Nightingale had darted forward:
‘If that’s what you think, Mrs Xue, why don’t you talk to Her Old Ladyship about it?’
‘Goodness, child, you are impatient!’ said Aunt Xue, laughing, ‘I suppose if you are
in such a hurry to get your mistress married, you must be thinking of a little husband
for yourself!’
‘Mrs Xue!’ said Nightingale, crimson-faced. ‘You ought to know better at your age!’
She turned and fled.
Dai-yu who, when Nightingale intervened, had angrily bidden her to mind her own
business, now gloated over her discomfiture:
‘Holy Name, it serves you right! You would poke your nose in, wouldn’t you, and
now you’ve got smut on it!’
There was a burst of laughter in which the maids and serving-women joined. They
were still laughing when Xiang- yun ran into the room, brandishing a piece of paper.
‘What sort of bill is this?’
Dai-yu examined the paper but could make nothing of it. The women below had
recognized it, however, and tittered with amusement.
‘That’s a nice thing for a young lady to be carrying! they said. ‘If you want to know
what that is, Miss, you’ll have to pay for the lesson!’
Bao-chai snatched the paper from Xiang-yun’s hand and looked. It was Xiu-yan’s
pawn ticket. She hurriedly folded it away.
‘It looks like a pawn ticket that one of the women must have dropped,’ said Aunt
Xue. ‘Whoever it is will be worried when she misses it. Where did you pick it up?’
‘What’s a pawn ticket?’ Xiang-yun asked her.
The women laughed:
‘What a simpleton! Fancy not knowing what a pawn ticket is!’
‘It’s hardly surprising,’ said Aunt Xue. ‘She’s had a very aristocratic upbringing,
don’t forget, and in any case she is still very young. How could she know about pawn
tickets? What occasion would she ever have of seeing one? In the household she
comes from even if one of the servants had such a thing, they would take very good
care that she didn’t see it. You shouldn’t call her a simpleton. I doubt very much
whether any of your own young ladies would know a pawn ticket if she saw one.’
‘That’s true,’ said the women, smiling. ‘Miss Lin here didn’t know, so you can be
quite sure the others wouldn’t. Even Bao-yu, although he goes outside quite a lot,
has probably never seen one.’
Aunt Xue now explained what a pawn ticket was. Xiang?yun and Dai-yu laughed
incredulously.
‘The things people do for money! Is that what they do in your pawnshops, Aunt?’
‘That’s a funny question!’ said the women, laughing. ‘All crows are black, you know.’
‘Where did you find this?’ Aunt Xue asked again.
But before Xiang-yun could reply, Bao-chai interrupted:
‘It’s an old ticket, Mamma; it was cancelled years ago. Caltrop has been using it to
fool them with.’
Aunt Xue believed her and did not pursue the matter.
Shortly after that a messenger arrived from the Ning-guo mansion to say that You-shi
would ‘like a word when convenient with Mrs Xue’ and Aunt Xue got up and left
them. As soon as she had gone, Bao-chai asked Xiang-yun where she had found the
ticket.
‘I saw Xiu-yan’s maid Signet handing it, very furtively, to Oriole and Oriole slip it
between the pages of a book. They thought I hadn’t noticed. I had a peep when
they’d gone, but I couldn’t make out what it was, and as I knew you were both here, I
thought I would come over and see if either of you could make anything of it.’
‘But why should Cousin Xing be pawning her clothes?’ said Dai-yu, puzzled. ‘And
why, having pawned them, should she want you, Chai, to have the ticket?’
Bao-chai saw that Xiu-yan’s circumstances could no longer be concealed and
explained to them both what had happened. Dai-yu, feeling ‘the fox’s sympathy for
the hunted hare’, was much distressed, but Xiang-yun’s reaction was one of anger.
‘I’m going straight over to see Ying-chun about this,’ she said. ‘You’ll feel better,
both of you, when I’ve given those beastly servants a piece of my mind.’
   She would have gone, too, had not Bao-chai restrained her.
   ‘Are you out of your mind? Sit down and stay where you are.’
   ‘If you were a man,’ said Dai-yu, laughing, ‘you could go around like a knight-errant
putting the world to rights; but a Jing Ke in skirts is just plain ridiculous!’
   ‘All right then,’ said Xiang-yun, ‘if you won’t let me talk to Cousin Ying about it,
let’s simply have Xiu-yan over to live with us.’
   ‘We’ll talk about that tomorrow,’ said Bao-chai. A servant put her head round the
door to make an announce?ment:
   ‘Miss Tan and Miss Xi have called.’
   Hearing of their arrival, the three in the room fell silent.
   For further details of the visit our reader is referred to the next chapter.




CHAPTER 58

In which the cock-bird who mourns his mate
Is found to be a hen
And a true heart is able to sympathize
with a strange kind of love



Our last chapter concluded with Tan-chun’s and Xi-chun’s arrival at the Naiad’s House,
which put a sudden stop to the discussion of Xiu-yan’s affairs by the other three.
Conversation was renewed after the new arrivals had inquired about Dai-yu’s health,
but of a general, unserious nature, and shortly afterwards all four visitors took their
leave and went their separate ways.
*

The Dowager Consort of the late Emperor whose illness we referred to in an earlier
chapter had now passed away and all noblewomen and wives of officials resident in
the capital had to put on the mourning appropriate to their rank and present
themselves at the Palace. A Special Edict was published prohibiting the holding of
musical or dramatic entertainments by persons of rank for a period of one year and
banning the celebration of marriages between commoners for a period of three
months. Every day Grandmother Jia together with Lady Xing, Lady Wang, You-shi and
Jia Rong’s wife Hu-shi had to go to the Palace to take part in the ceremonies of
mourning, seldom returning until well after two o’clock in the afternoon.
   These ceremonies, which took place in one of the side halls of the Palace, were
due to last for twenty-one days, at the end of which time the body of the Consort
was to be conveyed to the late Emperor’s mausoleum in Goodson prefecture, a
distance of some ten days’ journey from the capital. On reaching there, the coffin
was to lie in state for several more days while further ceremonies were performed
preliminary to its final interment in the mausoleum. The whole expedition, from start
to finish, would take about a month. Cousin Then and You-shi were both supposed to
take part in it, which would mean that throughout that period both the Ning-guo and
Rong-guo mansions would be left masterless. A family council was held and it was
decided, in order that one person at least should be left in charge of the two
mansions, to petition for You-shi’s exemption on the grounds that she was enceinte.
At the same time Aunt Xue’s help was enlisted to keep an eye on the young people.
For this purpose it was essential that she should move into the Garden; but it was
something of a prQblem to know in which of its buildings she should stay. Bao-chai
already had Xiang-yun and Caltrop living with her; Li Wan was having to
accommodate Bao-qin, whom Grandmother Jia had placed temporarily in her care,
and though Mrs Li and her girls were still at their uncle’s place in the city, they too
were constantly dropping in on her and staying for three or four nights; Ying-chun
was sharing with Xu-yan; Tan-chun was fully occupied with household business, and
in any case the noisy bickering of Aunt Zhao and Jia Huan, who were constantly
coming round to pester her, would have made her apartment a highly unsuitable
place for Aunt Xue to live in; and Xi-chun’s place was too small. That left only the
Naiad’s House for her to move into.
Aunt Xue did so the more readily because, in discussing these arrangements with her,
Grandmother Jia had impressed upon her that Dai-yu was the young person most
particularly in need of her care. And besides, Aunt Xue had always had a very great
affection for Dai-yu. Now that they shared the same apartment she was able to give
her undivided attention to Dai-yu’s welfare - to seeing that she had good food and
enough of it, and that she took her medicines at the proper times. Never before had
Dai-yu been so well looked after. She responded with a gratitude deeper than words,
though it was by words that it was most often expressed: Aunt Xue was now her kind
‘Mamma’, and when Bao-chai and Bao-?qin were present, she addressed them and
referred to them exactly as if they were her elder and younger sisters. Grandmother
Jia, who had been worried at the prospect of being separated, even for a month,
from her orphaned granddaughter, was both relieved and happy to observe this new
development.
Aunt Xue, now that she was in the Garden, concerned herself only with the welfare
of the cousins and disciplining of their maids; in other domestic matters, however
important, she was unwilling to intervene. You-shi, too, although she visited the
Rong-guo mansion daily, did little more than hear the roll-call and was most unwilling
to exercise any real authority. As the only responsible person left in it she already had
her hands full with the affairs of the other mansion and was kept extremely busy
seeing that the temporary lodg?ings near the Palace which Grandmother Jia and the
other ladies retired to in between ceremonies were kept regularly supplied with food
and bedding and so forth.
While the senior members of the Ning-guo and Rong-guo mansions were so busy, the
stewards and stewardesses of the two mansions were no less occupied, some of
them in accompanying their mistresses each day to and from the Palace, some in
attending to the provisioning and maintenance of the temporary lodgings, and some
as an advanced party who staffed the lodgings in readiness for their mistresses’
arrival.
Lacking the discipline normally imposed by these officers, the domestics of both
mansions who remained behind grew slovenly in their duties or took advantage of
the exceptional circumstances to ally themselves with those placed temporarily in
charge as a means of scoring off fellow-servants. Of the male staff at Rong-guo House
only Lai Da and one or two others remained. Nearly all Lal Da’s most trusted
lieutenants had gone. Owing to their inexperience he was finding the replacements
he had made extremely unserviceable -and so stupid: their peculations were so
transparently gross, their reports so patently unreliable, their recommendations so
obviously biased; he would have had difficulty in enu?merating all the defects he
found in them or the troubles they caused him.
At this time all the great families which kept troupes of actors or actresses in their
households were beginning to disband them. Hearing this, You-shi, after discussing
the matter with other members of the family, approached Lady Wang with the
suggestion that their own troupe of actresses should be disbanded. The method by
which she proposed to do this was economical.
‘We have, of course, bought these girls,’ she said. ‘Although they can’t keep up their
music, there’s no reason why we shouldn’t use them as maids. It’s only really the
instructors that we need to get rid of.’
‘No,’ said Lady Wang firmly. ‘We cannot treat them like servants. These are
daughters of free men, sold into their profession because their parents could not
afford to keep them. They have given us a year or two of good entertainment. Now
that this opportunity of releasing them has arisen, we ought to give them each a few
taels and let them go. That was cer?tainly what our ancestors would have done; and I
do not believe that we have become quite so degenerate or so un?generous that we
cannot, in this matter at least, follow the ancestors’ example. It’s true that we have a
few members of an earlier troupe still living with us; but there was a special reason
for their staying. They didn’t want to go, so we gave them employment and found
husbands among the staff for them when they were old enough to marry.’
‘Very well, we shall ask them,’ said You-shi. ‘If they want to go, we can send for
their parents to come and fetch them and give the money to their parents. That will
be safest. Otherwise we shall have all sorts of dubious characters turning up here to
collect them and selling them when they get them outside, and our kindness in
freeing them will be wasted. Of course, any of them who don’t want to go can stay
with us.’
Lady Wang agreed and You-shi sent someone to Xi-feng to explain what had been
decided. She also instructed the clerks in the counting-house to pay eight taels to
each of the in?structors and tell them that they were free to go where they liked. The
costumes, theatrical properties and other movables in Pear Tree Court were carefully
checked against the inventories and stored away and a caretaker was put in charge of
the buildings.
As for the little actresses, on interviewing them individually, You-shi found that hardly
any of them wanted to go. Some said that their parents were alive but did not care
for them and would only sell them again if they went back to them; others that they
had no parents and had been sold by uncles or brothers; others that they had no
relations at all that they could go to; others that they had become attached to the Jia
family and did not want to leave. In the end all but three of them elected to stay.
After what she had said, Lady Wang could scarcely refuse to have them.
The three who were leaving were taken away by their foster-mothers to stay with
them for the time being until their real parents could come to fetch them. Those who
had chosen to stay were assigned to different apartments - mostly in the Garden - as
servants. Elegante, the leader of the troupe1 was reserved for Grandmother Jia; the
'leading lady', Parfumee, went to Bao-yu; Etarnine, the soubrette, to Bao-chai; the
'principal boy', Nenuphar, to Dai-yu; Althee, the leading 'painted face', to Xiang-yun;
Cardamome, the second 'painted face', to Bao-qin; Artemisie, who specialized in old
men's parts, to Tan-chun; and You-shi asked if she might keep Aubergine, who
specialized in old women's parts, for herself.
The little actresses, though nominally in service, did nothing all day but wander
about happily in the Garden, like uncaged birds rejoicing in their new freedom.
Nobody made much effort to discourage them, as it was understood that they were
wholly unaccustomed to waiting on other people and were none of them able to sew.
It is true that one or two of them had the good sense to see that the future would be
bleak for them without a craft, now that their theatrical training had been
discontinued, and who applied themselves to learning domestic skills like sewing and
spinning; but they were the exception.
An important day in the obsequies of the late Consort arrived when it was necessary
for Grandmother Jia and the other ladies to start out for their temporary lodgings
near the Palace at four o'clock in the morning. After recruiting themselves there with
a small collation, they proceeded to the Palace to attend the ghostly breakfast of the
Deceased. When that was over, they went back to their lodgings and had lunch. Then,
after a brief rest, they returned to the Palace and remained there for both the None
and Vesper offerings. Then back to their lodgings again for dinner before finally
return?ing home.
The temporary lodgings were in the family temple of a high official in which
perpetual devotions were maintained by a sisterhood of Buddhist nuns. The nuns
occupied the two courtyards to east and west of the shrine-hall, but there were a
great many spare rooms in these courtyards, all of them kept scrupulously clean by
the nuns. The Rong-guo ladies had rented the rooms in the east courtyard and the
Prince of Bei-jing's ladies those in the west one. As they had to leave for the Palace
and return from it at the same times, the two lots of ladies had plenty of
opportunities of meeting each other, and many courtesies were exchanged between
them. But it is not with these outside matters that we are concerned.
Back, then, to the Garden. With Grandmother Jia and Lady Jia away for so much of
the day and the prospect of their being away altogether during the month it would
take them to travel to and from the mausoleum, there were a great many maids and
womenservants with nothing much to do but wander about in it enjoying themselves.
Their numbers were augmented by the women from Pear Tree Court, who were now
attached to different apartments in the Garden. Suddenly there seemed to be dozens
more people about in it than there ever had been before.
The girl-actresses were arrogant little creatures, imperious and tyrannical towards
the servants, demanding and fastidious about their food and clothing, sharp and
disputatious with their tongues - in a word, thoroughly difficult characters to deal
with. The Pear Tree Court women all hated them, but had not hitherto dared to
quarrel with them openly. To these women the closing of the drama school was a
great relief. Some of them, in their gladness to be free of it, were willing to let
bygones be bygones. Others, less magnanimous, still nursed their rancour but, the
diaspora having separated them from their former charges, dared not carry warfare
against them into another's territory.
It was the day of the Spring Cleaning festival and Jia Lian, having prepared the usual
offerings, had gone with Jia Huan, Jia Cong and Jia Lan to the Temple of the Iron
Threshold outside the city to clean the family graves. Jia Rong, accompanied by a
party of clansmen from the Ning-guo side of the family, had set out separately for the
same destination. Of the young male members of the family only Bao-yu, having not
yet wholly recovered from his illness, was unable to go. After lunch Aroma noticed
that he was showing a disposition to sleep.
‘It’s such a fine day,’ she said, ‘why don’t you take a stroll in the Garden? If you lie
down as soon as you’ve eaten, you won’t digest your food.’
Bao-yu stepped somewhat reluctantly into a pair of slippers and, supporting himself
with a walking-stick, shuffled off through the courtyard and out into the Garden.
Care of the Garden and its produce had lately been put into the hands of female
experts and, this being the busy tune of year for gardeners, they were t6 be observed
on every hand, trimming the bamboos, pruning trees and bushes, bedding plants Out,
planting bulbs and sowing seeds. Other women were moving over the surface of the
lake in punts, dredging up mud from the bottom and planting lotus-roots. On a
miniature mountain of rock overlooking the lake an appreciative audience consisting
of Xiang-yun, Caltrop, Bao-qin and some of the maids sat watching them. As Bao-yu
slowly made his way up to them, Xiang-yun cried out in mock alarm:
‘Quick, send the boats away! They’ve come to take Cousin Lin!’
Bao-yu blushed and laughed sheepishly.
‘People can’t help what they do when they’re ill. You shouldn’t make fun.’
‘It’s your fault for being so comical,’ said Xiang-yun. ‘Why do you always have to be
so different? Even your illnesses are different from everyone else’s.’
Bao-yu sat down with them for a while and watched the women working.
‘It’s a bit windy here,’ said Xiang-yun presently, ‘and the rock is rather cold to sit on.
Don’t you think you ought to go indoors?’
Bao-yu had already decided that he would like to go and see Dai-yu, so, hauling
himself up with his walking-stick, he took his leave of the girls and walked off, over
Drenched Blossoms Bridge and along the embankment on the other side.
New growth hung from the weeping willows in strings of gold and the blossom-buds
of the peach-trees had burst into a vermilion haze; but the big apricot-tree behind
the rockery, its flowering past, was already in full leaf and covered with tiny apricots,
each no bigger than a pea.
‘What a shame!’ he thought. ‘Just those few days in bed and I missed the apricot
blossom.

And in among the green leaves now
The young fruit hangs from every bough.

He stood and gazed at the tree. They were Du Mu’s lines, written on his last visit to
Hu-zhou, when he met the beautiful young dancer of a dozen years before and found
that she was now a married woman with a brood of children. How did it go?

The spring-time blossoms, white and red,
Before the thieving wind have fled;
And in among the green leaves now
The young fruit hangs from every bough.

He thought of Xing Xiu-yan’s betrothal. It would only be a year or two now before she
married, and soon she too, like the girl that Du Mu wrote about, would be a mother
with a brood of young children about her. People had to marry, of course: they had to
reproduce their kind. But what a way for a lovely young girl to end!

The spring-time blossoms, white and red...

Not so many years from now her jet-black tresses would turn to silver and her rosy
cheeks become wrinkled and colourless. The thought of it made him feel sad and an
involuntary sigh escaped from him. Then, as he continued to gaze at the tree, a little
bird flew up, and perching on one of its branches, began to sing away for all it was
worth. Bao-yu’s day-dreaming took another turn.
‘That bird must have come here when the tree was in blossom,’ he told himself.
‘What he’s singing is a lament at finding the blossoms gone. You can tell it’s a lament
by the sound. Pity Gong-ye Chang, who understood the language of birds, isn’t
around! I could have asked him what it was saying. I wonder if it will remember to
come here next year when the apricot-tree is in flower again?’
His reverie was interrupted by a sudden burst of flame beyond the rockery which
caused the bird to fly off in alarm. Bao-yu was almost as startled as the bird. The brief
crackle of flames was followed by an outburst of angry shouting.
‘Nenuphar, you little wretch, how dare you burn paper offerings here in the Garden!
I’m going straight off to report you. You’re in for a whipping, my girl.’
Wondering what on earth could be happening, Bao-yu hurried round to the other
side of the rockery to investigate. A tear-stained Nenuphar crouched on the ground,
holding the chafing-dish with which the recent blaze had been kindled, and gazing
with a sorrowful expression at the charred, still smouldering remains of a pile of gold
paper ‘spirit money’.
‘Who’s it for?’ he asked her. ‘You really shouldn’t burn it here, you know. I suppose
it must be for one of your parents -or is it for a brother, perhaps? Tell me the person’s
name and I’ll get my boys to go out and buy a proper baofu for you and write the
name on it.’
When she saw that it was Bao-yu, Nenuphar closed her lips tightly and no amount of
questioning would elicit an answer from her. Just then the woman he had heard
shouting came hurrying back, an evil expression of triumph on her face, and seized
hold of the girl.
‘Well, I’ve reported you to the young mistresses,’ she said, ‘and they’re very, very
angry.’
Nenuphar was still only a child. Terrified of the humiliation that awaited her, she now
made a childish attempt to resist going.
‘I said all along you were getting above yourselves,’ said the woman. ‘You can’t do
as you please in here like you could outside. It’s different here. We like to have a bit
of law and order.’ She pointed to Bao-yu. ‘Even Master Bao has to abide by the rules.
I don’t know what sort of a young madam you think you are to come along here and
start breaking them. Come on! It’s too late to start being afraid now. You’ll have to
come along and see them.’
‘That’s not spirit money,’ said Bao-yu hurriedly. ‘It’s waste paper she’s been burning
for Miss Lin. You should have looked more carefully before you reported her.’
To Nenuphar in her desperation Bao-yu’s appearance on the scene had been an
added terror. She could hardly believe her ears when she heard him covering up for
her. Her fear gave way to a surprised delight and she plucked up courage to defend
herself.
‘Yes, what makes you so sure it was spirit money? That was used writing-paper of
Miss Lin’s.’
But the woman was unimpressed. Stooping down, she picked out one or two of the
unconsumed fragments from the ashes.
‘Don’t argue with me! Here’s evidence! You’ll have to come with me to the jobs
room and explain yourself to them there.’
She took hold of Nenuphar by the sleeve and begun dragging her off; but Bao-yu
held her by the other sleeve and struck at the woman’s hand with his walking-stick
until she let go.
‘Take those bits of paper to them if you must,’ he said. ‘I suppose I shall have to tell
you. Last night I dreamed that the Spirit of the Apricot-tree came to me and said that
if I wanted to get better quickly, I must have an offering of spirit money made to her.
She said it had to be made by a stranger, not by anyone from my own room, and no
one else must know about it. And now, after I’ve been to the trouble of getting the
stuff and finding this girl to make the offering for me, it’s all wasted, because you saw
her doing it. This is the first day I’ve been up since my illness. If I get ill again now, it
will be your fault. Do you still want to take her? Nenuphar, go with her and see them.
Tell them exactly what I have just said. And when my grandmother gets back I shall
tell her what happened. I shall tell her that this woman interrupted you deliberately.’
Nenuphar was by now thoroughly cock-a-hoop. Now it was she who was tugging at
the woman. The woman threw the bits of paper to the ground and addressed herself
beseechingly to Bao-yu, a sickly smile on her face:
I didn’t know, really I didn’t. If you tell Her Old Ladyship that, it will be all up with
me.’
‘Don’t report back then, and I won’t tell her.’
‘But when I reported just now, they said I was to bring her,’ said the woman. ‘I’d
better tell them she’s been called away by Miss Lin.’
Bao-yu thought for a bit and then nodded. The woman went off to do as she had said.
When she had gone, Bao-yu resumed his questioning.
‘Who was it for then? I’m sure it wasn’t for anyone in your family. Is it a secret?’
Nenuphar was grateful to Bao-yu for having protected her. Knowing now that he was
a kindred spirit and to be trusted, she could hardly refuse him any longer. There were
tears in her eyes when she answered:
‘Besides myself there are only two other people in the world who know about this:
Parfumee in your room and Etamine in Miss Bao’s. After what happened today, I
think I shall have to let you be a third; but you must promise never to speak about it
to anyone else.’
She began to cry.
‘It’s no good,’ she said. ‘I can’t say it to your face. After you’ve got back, when
there’s no one else around, you can get Parfumee to tell you.’
She slipped away then, leaving him full of curiosity.
Continuing his walk to the Naiad’s House, he found Dai-yu looking thinner than ever
but feeling, she assured him, very much better than she had been a few days earlier.
She noticed how much thinner be had become, and the recollection of what had
caused them both to look so haggard provoked the shedding of a few tears. They had
not been speaking for more than a few minutes when, mindful that he was still
convales?cent, she urged him to go back and rest and he felt obliged to obey her.
When he got back, he was anxious to ask Parfumee about Nenuphar’s secret, but
Xiang-yun and Caltrop had just arrived and were engaged in lively conversation with
her and Aroma in the adjoining room. Fearing that if he called her to him the others
might ask questions, he resolved to be patient.
After a while Parfumee went off with her foster-mother to have her hair washed. Her
foster-mother had already let her own daughter wash her hair in the water. When
Parfumee noticed this, she was loud in protest.
What, give me the water your daughter’s washed in? Considering you take the whole
of my monthly allowance, I think I deserve better than left-overs!’
Angry - the more so because she was in the wrong - the woman shouted back at her.
‘Ungrateful little wretch! I’m not surprised they say players are hard folk to handle.
However good a person may be to start with, once they get into that profession,
they’re ruined. You’d never think a scrubby little creature like this could have so many
airs and graces. Nothing but the best for young madam! Sixes or aces, nothing else!
And such a spiteful, sharp little tongue if she doesn’t get what she wants! Worse than
a biting mule!’
The two of them began to go at it then, hammer and tongs. Aroma Sent someone
outside to quieten them:
‘A little less shouting, you two! Just because Her Old Ladyship isn’t here, nobody
seems able to say anything without hollering at the tops of their voices!’
‘It’s that Parfumee making trouble,’ said Skybright. ‘I don’t know what makes her
think she’s so wonderful. Just because she knows a few plays, you’d think she’d won
the war or something!’
‘It takes two to make an argument,’ said Aroma. ‘The older one shouldn’t be so
unjust and the younger one shouldn’t be so unpleasant.’
‘You can’t blame Parfumee,’ said Bao-yu. “‘Any departure from the straight or even
causes things to give voice.” A famous philosopher wrote that. She’s here without
parents or anyone to look after her. This woman takes her money and then doesn’t
treat her properly. If that’s not a departure from the straight and even, I don’t know
what is. You can hardly blame her for giving voice about it! How much does she get a
month, anyway?’ he asked Aroma. ‘Wouldn’t it save a lot of trouble if you took the
money and looked after her yourself?’
‘I don’t mind looking after her,’ said Aroma, ‘but if I do, it certainly won’t be for the
money. It wouldn’t be worth making enemies over.’
She got up as she said this and, going into the other room, took a little bottle of Oil of
Flowers, some hen’s eggs, some soap and a hair-string and told one of the old
women to convey them to Parfumee outside.
‘Tell her to stop quarrelling. Tell her she can get some more water and wash her
own hair with these.’
Unfortunately the foster-mother chose to regard this as a public humiliation for her
and grew even angrier.
‘You wicked child,’ she said to Parfumee’, ‘pretending that I keep back your money!’
She dealt her a couple of slaps, whereupon Parfumee burst out crying. Bao-yu was
about to rush outside, but Aroma restrained him.
‘What are you doing? I’ll speak to her.’
But Skybright had already darted outside and was pointing at the woman angrily:
‘You ought to know better, at your age! If we give her the things to wash her hair
with that you wouldn’t give her yourself, you ought to feel ashamed. I don’t know
how you can have the face to hit her. You wouldn’t have dared hit her if she’d been in
the school still, carrying on with her training.’
‘I hit her for trying to show me up in public,’ said the woman. ‘I’m her foster-mother.
I’ve a right to.’
‘Musk,’ said Aroma, ‘I’m no good at arguing with people and Skybright is too
excitable. You’ll have to go and deal with her.’
Musk hurried over.
‘All right, all right. There’s no need to shout. Let me just ask you this one question.
When have you ever seen anyone punishing their daughter in the master’s or
mistress’s presence - I don’t lust mean here, I mean anywhere in the whole Garden?
Even in the case of a real daughter, not just a foster-daughter, once she’s left home
and gone into service it’s for her master or mistress to punish her or the senior maids.
We can’t have parents chipping in all the time - otherwise how should we ever
manage to train a girl? I don’t know! You people, the older you get, the worse you
seem to behave! It’s not so long ago that we had Trinket’s mother in here making a
scene. I suppose she must be your model. But don’t worry. During these last few days
what with this one ill and that one ill and Her Old Ladyship busy all the time with
other matters we haven’t had a chance to report anything. But give us a few more
days. We shall find an opportunity. We’ll tell her everything. Then perhaps we shall
see some of you high?handed people taken down a peg. And another thing. There’s
Bao-yu in there only just beginning to get better - even we daren’t raise our voices
above a whisper - yet here are you hitting a girl outside his room and making her cry
like a howling wolf or a banshee. The top people only have to be away from the
house for a day or two and already you are behaving as if you were above the law. No
one is safe from you. A few more days and you’ll be hitting us, I shouldn’t wonder! If
you ask me, you’re the sort of foster-mother the girl could do without. If you think
the plant will only flourish with your tender care, you’re very much mistaken!’
Bao-yu was so angry that he banged on the threshold with his stick.
‘These old women have hearts of stone. It’s bad enough that they can’t look alter
the girls, but to go maltreating them as well ...!

Almighty earth and heaven, what’s to do?’
‘What’s to do?’ said Skybright. ‘Send the lot of them packing, useless baggages!’
The woman, shamed into silence by Musk’s tirade, made no reply.
Musk looked at Parfumee, in her crabflower-red padded tunic and patterned green
silk trousers unbound at the ankles, her glossy black hair hanging down her back,
crying as if her heart would break. It was a spectacle so different from her more
familiar stage appearances that Musk could not help laughing at its incongruousness:
‘I must say, you don’t look much like Cui Ying-ying at the moment. Reddie after her
beating, though: now that’s a part you could play without having to make up for it!’
Skybright led Parfumee away and washed her hair for her. When she had towelled it
dry, she did it up for her in a ‘lazy knot’ and told her to go back to Bao-yu’s room
when she had finished dressing.
Shortly after, a woman arrived from the kitchen to say that the food was ready,
should they send it over yet? One of the junior maids went inside to ask Aroma.
‘What does the clock say?’ Aroma asked. ‘With all that rumpus going on outside, I
didn’t hear it strike.’
‘It didn’t,’ said Skybright. ‘The wretched thing needs repairing again, I don’t know
why.’
She fetched a watch from somewhere and inspected it.
‘It’s about half a cup of tea off dinner-time,’ she said. ‘Tell them we’ll be ready
directly.’
The girl went off to relay this message.
‘Come to think of it,’ said Musk, smiling, ‘that Parfumee deserved a slap or two for
being so mischievous. She was the one who made the clock stop by playing about
with the pendulum yesterday.’
She began getting things out and laying them in readiness for the meal. Presently
junior maids carrying food-boxes came into the room and stood there while
Skybright and Musk removed the covers and inspected the contents: a bowl of soup
and the now familiar rice-gruel flanked by four different kinds of pickle.
‘But he’s better now,’ said Skybright. ‘How much longer has he got to go on eating
gruel and vegetables in brine? Why can’t they send him some proper food for a
change?’
Musk had finished laying now. Taking the large bowl of soup (ham and
bamboo-shoots) from the food-box, she put it on the table for Bao-yu to try. He bent
down over the bowl and slurped up a mouthful.
‘Ow, hot!’
Aroma laughed.
‘Holy Buddha! You’re not all that starved for meat, surely? I’m not surprised you
burn yourself if you go at it so greedily.’
She picked up the bowl and gently blew on it, then, as Parfumee happened to be
standing by, she handed it to her:
‘Here, you can do it. You may as well make yourself useful, instead of mooning
around all day doing nothing. But blow on it gently: we don’t want you spitting in it.’
Parfumee began blowing as instructed. She seemed to be managing very nicely, but
the foster-mother, who was standing outside the partition doorway whither she had
insisted on coming ‘to help’ and who, in her ignorance of the Garden’s etiquette, saw
this as an opportunity of making up to the maids, came hurrying officiously into the
room and tried to take the bowl from her.
‘She’s too inexperienced. She might drop it. Let me blow.’
Skybright shouted at her angrily:
‘Get out of here at once! Whether she breaks the bowl or not is our affair: we don’t
need you blowing on it, at all events. Who said you could come inside the partition,
any?way?’
Her anger transferred itself to the junior maids:
‘Young idiots! She probably doesn’t know about these things. You ought to have
told her.’
‘We tried to keep her out,’ the maids protested. ‘We tried to tell her, but she
wouldn’t believe us. Now do you believe us?’ they asked the woman. ‘Even the
places we’re allowed into you’re only allowed into about half of’ but you seemed to
think you could go bursting in even where we aren’t allowed to go - and you were
shouting and waving your hands at us when we tried to stop you.’
They hustled her from the outer room, into which she had retreated, onto the
verandah outside. The old women waiting in the courtyard below to take back the
food-boxes and empty bowls laughed at her when she emerged.
‘You should ‘a taken a look at yourself in the mirror before you went inside,
missus!’
The woman, angry and ashamed, had to bear their taunts in silence.
Parfumee was still blowing away at the soup. Bao-yu smiled at her:
‘Don’t destroy your lungs with all that blowing! Why don’t you try it now, to see if
it’s all right?’
Parfumee thought he must be joking and smiled timidly at Aroma and the rest.
‘Go ahead, taste it!’ said Aroma. ‘Why not?’
‘Watch me taste it,’ said Skybright, and took a sip from the bowl.
Encouraged by her example, Parfumee took a sip too.
‘It’s all right,’ she said, and handed Bao-yu the bowl.
Bao-yu drank about half the soup, ate a few pieces of bamboo-shoot, consumed half
a bowlful of the gruel, and declared himself satisfied. The servants cleared away. A
little maid came in with a wash-bowl. After he had washed his hands and rinsed his
mouth out, it was Aroma’s and the other senior maids’ turn to have their dinner.
Bao-yu signalled to Parfumee with his eyes. A sharp-witted child - one, moreover,
who had spent several years of young life in a school of drama - Parfumee responded
like an old trouper. She had a stomach-ache, she told them. She didn’t feel like any
dinner.
‘Oh well, if you’re not eating,’ said Aroma, ‘you may as well stay and keep him
company. We’ll leave the gruel here. If you get hungry, you can eat some of that.’
She and the other maids then left.
Bao-yu was now able to tell Parfumee about his encounter with Nenuphar - how he
had lied to protect her and how, feeling unable to answer his question herself, she
had referred him to Parfumee for an explanation.
‘So who was she making the offering for?’
Parfumee’s eyes reddened slightly and she sighed.
‘Oh, Nenuphar is crazy.’
‘Why?’ said Bao-yu. ‘What do you mean?’
‘It was for Pivoine,’ said Parfumee, ‘the girl in our troupe who died.’
‘There’s nothing crazy about that,’ said Bao-yu, ‘if they were friends.’
‘Friends!’ said Partumee. ‘They were more than that. It was Nenuphar’s soppy
ideas that started it all. You see, Nenuphar is our Principal Boy and Pivoine always
played opposite her as Principal Girl. They became so accustomed to acting the part
of lovers on the stage, that gradually it came to seem real to them and Nenuphar
began carrying on as if they were really lovers. When Pivoine died, Nenuphar cried
herself into fits, and even now she still thinks about her. That’s why she makes
offerings to her on feast-days. When Etamine took over the roles that Pivoine used to
play, Nenuphar became just the same towards her. We even teased her about it:
“Have you forgotten your old love then, now that you’ve got yourself a new one?”
But she said, “No, I haven’t forgotten. It’s like when a man loses his wife and
remarries. He can still be faithful to the first wife, as long as he keeps her memory
green.” Did you ever hear anything so soppy in your life?’
‘Soppy’ or whatever it was, there was a strain in Bao-yu’s own nature which
responded to it with a powerful mixture of emotions: pleasure, sorrow, and an
unbounded admiration for the little actress. He took Parfumee’s hands in his own
and told her with great earnestness what she must say to Nenuphar.
‘Tell her never, never to use that paper stuff again. “Spirit money” is a superstitious
invention of modern times: you’ll find nothing about it in the teachings of Confucius.
All she needs to do when feast-days come round is to light a little incense in a burner.
Provided that it’s done with reverence, that’s all that’s needed for conveying one’s
feelings to the dead. It’s the sincerity with which we make the offering, not the
offering itself that counts. You see that burner on the table over there? Whenever I
want to remember someone dear to me - it doesn’t necessarily have to be on a
feast-day or any particular day, by the way - I light some incense in it and put out a
cup of fresh tea or water, or sometimes some flowers or fruit if I have any. You can
even use “unclean foods”- as long as they’re devoutly offered: that’s the important
thing. Tell her not to go burning that paper stuff any more.’
Parfumee promised. After that she finished off the gruel. Then someone came in to
say that Grandmother Jia had got back.
Of that you shall hear more in the next chapter.

CHAPTER 59

By Willow Walk the conservers of property
resort to violence and abuse
And at Green Delights the defenders of law and order
invoke a higher authority



Hearing that his grandmother and the other ladies were back, Bao-yu put on an extra
garment and shuffled off, walking-stick in hand, to greet them. He found them tired
out by the taxing routine of the past few days and anxious to retire to bed as soon as
possible. Nothing of interest happened during that night. The ladies were up again at
four o’clock next morning and off once more to the Palace.
The date of their departure for the mausoleum was fast approaching. Faithful, Amber,
Parrot and Pearl busied themselves getting together the things that Grandmother Jia
would need on the journey, while Silver, Suncloud and Sunset did the same for Lady
Wang. When all was ready, they went over everything, item by item, with the most
senior of the servants who were accompanying their mistresses. There were
altogether sixteen of these: six maids and ten older women. The male servants, who
are not included in that number, were meanwhile preparing the mule-litters that
their mistresses would ride in and getting the harness and other gear into good order.
Faithful and Silver were not among the sixteen. They were to stay behind and look
after their mistresses’ apartments while they were away.
Some days before the funeral cortege was due to set out, the maids packed up the
covers and hangings of their mistresses’ travelling-beds. These were collected by a
party of four or five women, who, with the aid of some men?servants, took them by
cart through the back streets to the lodgings where their mistresses were to spend
the night be?fore their departure and put them up ready for them to sleep in.
The Jia ladies and their retinue left the mansion the day before the cortege was due
to start. Grandmother Jia and Jia Rong’s wife shared the first litter; Lady Wang
followed on her own in the second; Cousin Zhen and the menservants provided them
with a mounted escort. Then followed several large covered carts in which the maids
and womenservants were travelling. The carts also carried a large number of bundles
containing changes of clothing for the ladies. The other members of the family, led by
Aunt Xue and You-shi, accompanied the little procession as far as the outer threshold
of the main gate to see the old lady off.
While the column was reforming itself in the street, Jia Lian appeared on horseback
at the head of a small party of mounted grooms. He shepherded his parent’s litters
into place between those of Grandmother Jia and Lady Wang, then, fearful of the
possible consequences of leaving the baggage train with its female freight unguarded,
trotted back to a position behind the carts and, with his mounted followers, brought
up the rear.
Inside the mansion Lai Da greatly increased the numbers of the watch and ordered
the entrances to the two main courtyards to be kept permanently closed. Anyone
wanting to go in or out of the mansion now had to do so through the small side gate
on the west corner. The ornamental gate dividing the outer from the inner part of the
mansion was closed at sundown. So, too, were the main and side gates of the Garden.
The gate which the cousins normally used for getting into or out of the rear part of
Lady Wang’s quarters and the gate on the east side which gave access to the corner
gate of Aunt Xue’s courtyard were left open. Since they affected only the
intercommunication of the already sealed-off inner parts of the mansion, it did not
seem necessary to close them. Faithful and Silver shut up the living-rooms normally
occupied by their mistresses and went to sleep with the other maids in the servants’
quarters at the back. Each day at sundown Lin Zhi-xiao’s wife conducted a party of
ten or so senior women into the Garden to police it during the night. The number of
pages employed in the gallery outside for the purpose of sounding the night-watches
was increased. Everything was done, in short, to ensure that the security of the
mansion was maintained.
*

Waking one fine, fresh morning from vernal slumbers, Bao- chai, on raising the
bed-curtain and stepping down into the room, became sensible of a very slight
chilliness in the air, the reason for which was apparent when she opened the door
and looked out. A little shower, falling in the last watch before dawn, had refreshed
the earth and turned the mosses everywhere a more brilliant shade of green. She
went in again and called to the others to get up.
While they were washing, Xiang-yun complained of an irritation in her cheeks which
she feared might herald an outbreak of the mild eczema she sometimes suffered
from and asked Bao-chai for some rose-root orris to put on them.
‘I gave the last of it to Qin a few days ago,’ said Bao-chai. ‘Frowner has a lot. I had
been meaning to ask her for some, but as I haven’t had any trouble with my own
cheeks this year, I forgot about it.’
She ordered Oriole to go and get some. As Oriole was about to leave, Etamine said
that she would like to go with her because she wanted to talk to Nenuphar. The two
girls set off from All-spice Court, chattering and laughing as they went.
At Willow Walk they followed the line of the embankment. The trailing golden strings
of the weeping willows were already flecked with emerald.
‘Do you know how to weave things with these?’ Oriole smilingly asked her
companion.
‘What sort of things?’ said Etamine.
‘Oh, things to look at, things to use - all sorts. Just wait while I break off a few and
I’ll weave a little basket out of them. I’ll leave the leaves on, then, if we fill it with
different kinds of flowers, it will look ever so pretty.’
Temporarily forgetting about the orris-powder, she reached up and broke off some of
the tender willow-twigs. She got Etamine to hold them for her; then, as they walked
along together, she plaited them into a little basket. From time to time she stopped
to pick a flower or two that grew beside the way. The finished basket was a pretty
little open-work one with a handle, bursting all over with the greenery which she had
been careful not to pull off. When it was filled up and stuck all over with flowers, it
looked really charming. Etamine was enraptured:
  ‘Oh, Oriole, do let me have it!’
  ‘We’ll give this one to Miss Lin,’ said Oriole. ‘We can pick some more twigs on the
way back and I’ll make baskets like this for you all.’
By this time the two girls had arrived at the Naiad’s House. Dai-yu had not yet
completed her toilet. She was very much taken with Oriole’s handiwork.
‘Ah, a living basket! Who made it?’
‘I did,’ said Oriole. ‘It’s for you, miss.’
‘Oh, but it’s charming!’ said Dai-yu, taking it. ‘No wonder they’re always saying how
clever you are with your hands.’
After admiring it a little longer, she told Nightingale to hang it up where she could see
it
Oriole first inquired politely after Aunt Xue and then asked Dai-yu about the
rose-orris. Dai-yu told Nightingale to wrap some up for her.
‘I’m better now,’ she told Oriole as she handed her the packet. ‘I feel like going out
today for some exercise. Tell Chai that there’s no need for her to pay her call on
Mamma today or to visit me. As soon as I’ve done my hair, Mamma and I will be
coming over to her place. We can have our lunch there. We shall be quite a little
family party!’
Oriole promised to relay the message and went into Nightingale’s room to collect
Etamine; but Etamine and Nenuphar had just reached the most interesting part of
their conver?sation and were most unwilling to be separated. Oriole pro?posed a
solution to Nightingale.
‘Your mistress is going over to our place presently. Why not let Nenuphar come
with us now and wait for her there?’
‘By all means,’ said Nightingale. ‘She gets up to so much mischief, we shall be glad
to have her off our hands for a bit!’
She got out Dai-yu’s spoon and chopsticks, wrapped them up in a napkin of West
Ocean linen, and held them out for Nenuphar.
‘Here you are: you can take these for her. May as well make yourself useful.’
Nenuphar took the things from her and set off, smiling happily, with the other two.
They made their way to Willow Walk again and Oriole broke off a lot more twigs and,
sit?ting down on a nearby rock, began straightway plaiting them to make into
another basket. She told Etamine to go ahead with the rose-orris and come back for
her presently when she had delivered it; but both girls were fascinated by Oriole’s
skilful weaving and could not tear themselves away. Oriole threatened to suspend
work on the basket if Etamine did not do as she was told.
‘Come on,’ said Nenuphar. ‘I’ll go with you. We can hurry back in no time.’
After they had gone, while Oriole sat plaiting on her own, Mamma He’s daughter
Swallow walked up and smilingly asked her what she was making. Oriole was still
talking to her when the other two got back. Swallow looked at Nenu?phar curiously.
‘Tell me, what was that paper you were burning the other day when my Aunt Xia
caught you? She was going to report you, but Bao-yu made out that it was she who
was in the wrong, so she couldn’t go through with it. She was ever so angry. She
came and told my mother all about it. What on earth did you do during all that time
you were living out?side together to make such an enemy of her?’
Nenuphar sniffed.
‘I didn’t do anything. It’s because she’s so greedy. She can’t squeeze as much out of
me as she used to be able to. To mention nothing else, look at all the food she and
the others used to take home with them when they were working with us outside.
You know they did.’
Swallow laughed.
‘She’s my own aunt. I can’t very well criticize her in front of other people. I must
admit, though, it does seem to be as Bao-yu once said. “A girl before she marries is
like a price?less pearl, but once she marries the pearl loses its lustre and develops all
sorts of disagreeable flaws, and by the time she’s an old woman, she’s no longer like
a pearl at all, more like a boiled fish’s eye.” He said, “How can the same person, at
different times in her life, seem like three completely different people?” - Of course, I
knew at the time he was only talking his usual nonsense; but really there does seem
to be some truth in it. I don’t know about other people’s families, but it’s certainly
true of my mother and my aunt. The older they get, the more they seem to care
about nothing else but money. When we were all living together at home, they used
to com?plain that there weren’t any job for us that would bring in a bit of income.
Then this Garden was built and I was lucky enough to be among those who were
chosen to work in it -doubly lucky, in fact, because I was assigned to Green Delights.
That meant that quite apart from the fact that they didn’t have to find my keep any
more, they were getting an additional four or five hundred cash each month that I
managed to save out of my wages. You’d have thought they’d have been satisfied
with that, but oh no! Then they got jobs themselves, looking after these player-girls
in Pear Tree Court. My Aunt Xia had Nenuphar for foster-daughter and my mother
had Parfumee. So for this last year or two they’ve been really comfortably off. Now
that you’ve all moved inside, of course, it’s rather out of their hands; but they won’t
give up. It really makes you laugh. First my aunt having that row with Nenuphar, and
then my mother having that row with Parfumee. That was over the shampoo.
Parfumee had asked my mother I don’t know how many times to shampoo her hair
for her. Then Parfumee’s monthly allowance came in and my mother had no excuse
for putting her off any longer, so she bought the shampoo, but when she’d bought it,
she told me to wash my hair with it first. Well, I didn’t like to do that. I mean, I’ve got
money of my own, and even if I hadn’t, I could always get the stuff for washing my
hair with from Aroma or Skybright or Musk without any trouble by simply asking for
it. So I said no, I wouldn’t. So then she got hold of my younger sister and washed her
hair first. Needless to say, when she called Parfumee after that there was a quarrel.
Oh, and then she wanted to go and blow on Bao-yu’s soup. Oh dear, I could have died!
I told her about the rule as soon as I saw her going in, but she wouldn’t believe me.
Oh no, Mother knows best! So of course she made a fool of herself. It’s a good job
there are so many of us working in the Garden and no one can ever remember who
is related to who, otherwise they might get the impression that the people in my
family do nothing but quarrel all the time.’
‘Incidentally, this place where you’ve chosen to do your basket-making is on the
territory of another of my aunts - my father’s sister. Ever since she was put in charge
of it, she’s treated it as if it were her own property. She slaves away on it from
morning to night. What’s more, she makes me come and watch over it for her: she’s
so terrified of any of it getting spoiled. It’s got so that I can hardly do my own job
properly. And now that Mother’s moved into the Garden, she keeps an eye on it too.
The pair of them watch over it like hawks. No one else is allowed to touch a blade of
grass here. I don’t mind telling you, if they come along this way and find you’ve been
picking their flowers and breaking their young willow-twigs, they won’t be at all
pleased!’
‘In anyone else’s case, perhaps not,’ said Oriole; ‘but my case is different. When the
Garden was divided up, it was agreed that daily supplies of stuff from it were to be
sent to all the apartments. That included, apart from things to eat, flowers for
everyone’s hair and flowers to put in the vases. Now my mistress, it so happens, was
the only one who said she didn’t want a daily supply of flowers. She said she would
let them know whenever she wanted any, but up to now she never has. So you see,
in my case they are hardly likely to object even if they do find out that I’ve been
picking some.’
These words were scarcely out of her mouth when who should appear, hobbling
along on her stick, but this same aunt that Swallow had been talking about. Oriole
and Swallow invited her to come and sit down on the rock. The old woman felt a
pang of displeasure as her eye travelled from the little heap of broken willow-twigs to
the freshly-picked flowers that Nenuphar and Etamine were holding, but since it was
Oriole who appeared to be responsible, she forbore to complain of the vandalism
and found something to grumble at her own niece about instead.
‘When I tell you to come here and keep an eye on things, you prefer to stay at
home and play. Then when the others ask you to do something for them, you
pretend that you can’t because you’re already working for me. You use me like a
magic charm, so that you can do a disappearing act when?ever there’s a job of work
to be done!’
‘First you tell me to come here, then you’re afraid the others will want me so you
tell me off for being here,’ Swallow protested. ‘I can’t be in two places at once, aunt!’
‘Don’t you believe her, missus!’ said Oriole teasingly. ‘She’s the one who picked all
these things and pestered me to weave them for her. I tried to get rid of her, but she
wouldn’t leave me alone.’
‘For goodness sake!’ said Swallow agitatedly. ‘Don’t make jokes like that. She’ll take
you seriously.’
Alas, it was all too true! This aunt of Swallow’s was a stupid old woman whose senile
infatuation with money was such that beside it all human ties had long since ceased
to count. At Oriole’s words the pent-up anguish with which she viewed this hateful
spoliation of her domain found relief in action: she raised her stick and, with the
presumptuous tyranny of old age, struck Swallow several times with it across the
back.
‘Little baggage!’ she said. ‘How dare you answer me back! Your own mother hates
you so much she’s itching to get her teeth in you. Don’t you go raising your voice at
me!’
‘Oriole was only joking,’ said Swallow, weeping - partly from the pain and partly
from the humiliation of being beaten in front of the others. ‘Why should my mother
hate me? I haven’t burnt the washing-up water! What am I supposed to have done?’
Dismayed that her words should have had such an effect, Oriole stepped hurriedly
between them and seized the aunt’s upraised arm.
‘I was only joking, missus. Is it to shame me that you are beating her?’
‘I’ll thank you not to meddle in what doesn’t concern you, miss,’ said the old
woman. ‘Do you think I should not be allowed to discipline my own niece just
because you are here?’
The crassness of this reply caused Oriole to flush with anger.
‘You can discipline her any time you like, but I don’t see why you should choose to
do it when I make a joke,’ she said scornfully. ‘All right, go ahead and discipline her,
then.’
And releasing the old woman’s arm, she sat down on the rock again and got on with
her weaving.
The next thing that happened was that Swallow’s mother appeared on the scene,
looking for her daughter.
‘What are you doing there?’ she shouted as she caught sight of her. ‘I thought I told
you to go and fetch some water.’
‘Come over and see what she’s been doing,’ the old aunt shouted back at her. ‘I’ve
no hold over her any more than you now, it seems. She’s being very impertinent to
me.’
‘Oh, what’s she been doing this time, sister-in-law?’ said the woman, coming up to
them. ‘She’s got no use for her own mother any more, I knew that; but I thought she
might have a bit of respect left for you still.’
Recognizing the newcomer as Swallow’s mother, Oriole wanted to explain; but the
aunt did not give her a chance.
‘Look at that!’ she said, pointing to the willow-twigs on the rock. ‘A great girl like
her - you’d think she’d know better! And not content with that, leading other people
on to ruin me as well!’
Swallow’s mother was still smarting from her unsuccessful quarrel with Parfumee
and was angry with Swallow for not having taken her side.
‘Little strumpet!’ she shouted, bearing down on her wrathfully and slapping her
across the head. ‘How long now have you been working with those young madams? -
it hasn’t taken you very long to pick up their airs and graces! But don’t you go
thinking I can’t lay my hands on you any more. A foster-daughter’s one thing, but you
are my own flesh and blood. I can still look after you when I feel like it. Little painted
whores, telling me I can’t go inside where you can go! I wish you’d go inside and stay
there: perhaps if you stayed inside long enough, you might find a customer!’ She
grabbed hold of the little half-made willow basket and waved it in Swallow’s face.
‘And what’s this supposed to be? What’s the bloody meaning of this?’
‘I made that,’ said Oriole. ‘Don’t curse the mulberry tree when you mean the locust.
If it’s me you’re angry with, why not say so and leave her out of it?’
Swallow’s mother was intensely jealous of these senior maids like Oriole and Aroma
and Skybright, for she knew that their status and authority were greatly superior to
her own. She feared them and deferred to them, but doing so cost her a good deal of
angry resentment which she vented on the junior maids. On this occasion her anger
was further exacerbated by the presence of her sister’s enemy, Nenuphar.
Swallow was now making her way tearfully towards Green Delights. Her mother was
afraid that if they asked her there why she was crying and she told them, there would
be further insults to put up with from Skybright, so she hurried after her to try and
stop her.
‘You come back I’ she shouted. ‘You’ll go when I say you can.’
But Swallow refused to stop, and her mother, greatly incensed, rushed forward,
intending to lay hands on her. Swallow happened to turn and see her coming,
however, and got away by running even faster. Her mother, continuing the pursuit,
slipped on the moss and fell over, to the great delight of Oriole and the other two.
Oriole was by now so disgusted with the whole affair that she threw everything -
basket, twigs and flowers - into the water and went off home, leaving the old aunt
blessing her?self in pious horror at the waste.
‘Wicked creature!’ she called out after her. ‘You ought to be struck by lightning,
throwing away good flowers like that!’
She set about picking some herself then, to deliver to the various apartments.
As for Swallow, she went on running until she came to Green Delights. There, just
inside the courtyard, she ran full tilt into Aroma, who was just at that moment setting
out to pay a call on Dai-yu. Swallow clung to her imploringly.
‘Save me, miss! My mother’s going to beat me again.’
At the sight of the mother, arriving now in hot pursuit, Aroma could no longer
contain her annoyance.
‘That’s twice in three days: first your foster-daughter and now your own daughter.
Is it to show off the size of your family that you do this, or do you really not know any
better?’
Being a relative newcomer to the Garden, Swallow’s mother had as yet formed no
very clear impression of Aroma beyond that she spoke very little and was probably a
fairly harmless sort of person.
‘I should mind your own business, if I was you, miss,’ she said rudely. ‘You know
nothing about these matters. It’s because you’re all so soft with the girl that she’s got
so out of hand.’
She darted after Swallow again, her hand upraised to strike her. Aroma was so angry
that she turned round and began marching back to the house. On her way she
passed Musk, who was hanging some handkerchiefs out to dry under the crab-apple
tree. Musk looked over her shoulder to see what all the shouting was about.
‘I should leave them to it, if I were you,’ she advised Aroma. ‘Just let them get on
with it and see what happens.’
She signalled to Swallow with her eyes as she said this. Swallow’ understood her
immediately and dashed inside the house to take refuge with Bao-yu. The other
servants smiled at each other in pleasurable anticipation.
‘Now there’ll be trouble,’ they said. ‘Now we shall really see something!’
‘Why don’t you calm down a bit?’ Musk said to the woman. ‘Surely you’re not
going to set yourself up against the whole apartment?’
The woman saw her daughter go up to Bao-yu inside the house and Bao-yu take her
by the hand.
‘Don’t worry,’ Bao-yu said to the girl. ‘I’ll look after you.’ Swallow, still crying, told
him the whole story of Oriole and the willow-wigs. Bao-yu was deeply shocked, but,
for form’s sake, pretended to blame Swallow for what had hap?pened.
‘It’s bad enough having rows in here; what do you want to go upsetting your aunt
outside for?’
‘What this good woman said just now is right,’ Musk said to the other servants.
Perhaps we are too slack. Perhaps we don’t know enough about these matters to
deal with them properly ourselves. What we need is someone whose opinion she will
listen to, someone who really knows what’s what.’
She turned to a little maid standing near by.
‘Go and fetch Patience. If Patience can’t come, fetch Mrs Lin.’
As the little maid ran off on her errand, the other women in the compound drew
round Swallow’s mother with inter?ested smiles.
‘Better ask them to call that child back,’ they advised her. ‘You don’t want Miss
Patience coming here.’
‘If she’s “Miss Patience”, she’ll just have to be patient and listen to reason,’ said the
woman defiantly. ‘I never yet heard of a mother being disciplined for trying to
discipline her own daughter.’
The others smiled at her ignorance.
‘You don’t know who Miss Patience is, though. Miss Patience is Mrs Lian’s Number
One. If she’s in a good mood, you might get away with a telling-off; but if she’s not
my goodness, you’re in for a packet of trouble!’
Just then the little maid came back with a message.
‘Miss Patience was busy, but she asked me why I’d come and when I told her she
said, “Tell her she’s dismissed and get Mrs Lin on the corner gate to give her forty
strokes of the bamboo.”‘
It was now the mother’s turn for tears and entreaties.
‘It wasn’t easy for me to get this job,’ she said. ‘I shan’t get another like it. And I’m a
widow, too: I’ve no one else at home. From your point of view that’s an advantage,
because I can give all my attention to serving you. But it means that it’s my only
livelihood: if you turn me out, I don’t know how I’m going to keep alive.’
Aroma began to relent.
‘But if you want to stay here,’ she said, ‘you really must learn to behave yourself
and do what you are told. You really can’t go around hitting people all the time. What
are we to do with a person like you? This daily shouting and quarrelling is giving our
place a bad name.’
‘Take no notice of her,’ said Skybright. ‘Send her packing. Who’s got time to stand
around arguing with people like her?’
Swallow’s mother appealed to the other maids:
‘I admit I was in the wrong; but if you tell me what to do, I’m willing to learn. Give
me another chance, young ladies, you won’t regret it. It’s a “work of merit”, don’t
forget, to help another person mend their ways.’
She appealed to Swallow:
‘It was on account of beating you that I got into this tr6uble. And I didn’t beat you
very hard. Put in a word for me, there’s a good child!’
Bao-yu himself now felt sorry for the woman and told her that she could stay.
‘But no more trouble, mind! Any more trouble from you, and you’ll be out like a
shot - and you’ll be given the beating!’
The woman thanked first Bao-yu and then all the others in turn. She had already left
when Patience looked in to see what the trouble was.
‘Forget about it!’ said Aroma. ‘It’s all over.’
‘Well, they say “where mercy is possible, mercy should be shown”,’ Patience
observed. ‘If you can see your way to letting her off, it certainly saves us some
trouble. I can’t understand it, though. It’s only a few days since Their Ladyships left,
yet already the whole place seems to be in a state of mutiny. Before I’ve finished
dealing with trouble in one place, it crops up in another. I scarcely know which way to
turn.’
‘I thought we were the only ones,’ said Aroma. ‘I didn’t realize there were others.’
‘Oh, this is nothing!’ said Patience. ‘There have been seven or eight outbreaks just
during these last three or four days. Compared with the others, this trouble of yours
is a very minor affair. We’ve had something much more upsetting - and more
ridiculous - than this to contend with.’
Aroma was curious to know what it was. But as to whether Patience told her or not,
that will be revealed in the chapter which follows.

CHAPTER 60

As a substitute for rose-orris
Jia Huan is given jasmine face-powder
And in return for rose essence
Cook Liu is given lycoperdon snow



Aroma, you will recall, had asked Patience what in particular it was that had been
giving her so much trouble. Patience smiled mysteriously:
Something no one would ever guess. You’ll have a good laugh when I tell you. I won’t
tell you for a few days yet, though, because I still haven’t quite got to the bottom of it
-and I haven’t got time now, in any case.’
As if to prove that this was so, one of Li Wan’s little maids arrived at that very
moment:
‘Miss Patience? Oh, there you are! Mrs Zhu’s waiting for you. Why don’t you
come?’
‘I’m coming, I’m coming,’ said Patience, breaking away from the others with a laugh
and hurrying after her.
Aroma and the others laughed, too.
‘She’s grown as popular as hot cakes since her mistress’s illness: everyone wants
her at once!’
Patience’s business with Li Wan is no part of our story. We remain with Bao-yu and
the test at Green Delights.
‘Swallow,’ said Bao-yu, ‘you and your mother had better go to Miss Bao’s place and
make it up with Oriole. You can’t let her go on feeling offended.’
‘Yes,’ said Swallow, and hurried out to find her mother. Bao-yu shouted to them
through the window as the two of them were crossing the courtyard:
‘Don’t say anything about it in front of Miss Bao. You don’t want Oriole to get a
telling-off.’
Mother and daughter shouted back a reply and continued on their way, conversing as
they went. Swallow began reproaching her mother when they were out of earshot:
‘I told you, Mother, again and again, but you wouldn’t believe me. All this trouble
you’ve got yourself into - it was so unnecessary.’
‘Get along with you, little hussy!’ said her mother, laughing. ‘You know what the
proverb says: “Never suffer, never learn”. I’ve learned my lesson. I don’t need any
lectures from you!’
‘If only you could be content with the job you’ve got, Ma, and not be always
pushing forward so,’ said Swallow gently. ‘There are all sorts of benefits to be had
from working here, after you’ve been here some length of time. I’ll tell you just one
of them. Bao-yu says that when the time comes, he’s going to ask Her Ladyship to
give us maids - all of us, that is, not just the ones who work in his room - our freedom,
so that you can marry us to whoever you like. What about that for a start?’
‘Really?’ Her mother’s delight was tempered with incredulity.
‘Why should I tell a lie?’
The pious invocations which this news evoked continued until they were almost at
All-spice Court. They arrived there when Bao-chai, Dai-yu, Aunt Xue and the others
were having lunch. Swallow and her mother waited until Oriole came out to make
the tea, then, as she emerged, Swallow’s mother stepped forward to make her
apology.
‘I’m afraid I was a bit hasty just now, miss. I said sonic things I shouldn’t have done.
I hope you won’t hold it against me. Anyway, I’m very sorry.’
Oriole, all smiles, begged them both to be seated and would have given them tea;
but mother and daughter said they had business to attend to and took their leave.
They were already on their way back to Green Delights when Etamine came hurrying
after them.


‘Just a minute, just a minute!’
She was holding a little packet which she wanted them to deliver to Parfumee for her.
It was rose-orris, she explained, for the face.
‘That’s a bit unnecessary, isn’t it?’ said Swallow. ‘They must have plenty of it there
they’d be only too willing to give her if she wanted any. Why go to the trouble of
sending her some?’
‘What they do with theirs is their concern,’ said Etamine. ‘This is mine and I want to
give it to her as a present. Please take it with you.’
Swallow could scarcely refuse.
When she and her mother got back to Green Delights, Jia Huan and Jia Cong were
with Bao-yu inside, having arrived on a formal visit a few moments previously to
inquire about his health. Swallow turned to her mother.
‘Now, Mother: I’ll go in alone. There’s no need for you to come in with me.’
Her mother received this without a murmur. All her former wilfulness was quite
forgotten and she stood docilely outside while Swallow entered.
Bao-yu, seeing her come in, realized that it was Only to report the successful
conclusion of her mission and nodded to her curtly to show that he had understood.
There was therefore no need for her to say anything, and after standing silently for a
few moments inside the doorway, she slipped out again, signalling with her eyes to
Parfumee as she did so to follow her into the Outer room. There she handed the
packet to her and told her in an undertone what Etamine had asked her to say.
Bao-yu, having nothing whatever to talk to his visitors about, had been idly following
this transaction out of the corner of his eye, and when Parfumee came in again, he
asked her what it was that she was holding. Parfumee told him and handed him the
packet. He praised Etamine’s thoughtfulness while opening it up to have a look.
Jia Huan craned forward and smelt the powder’s cool, delicious scent. Stooping down,
he fished a sheet of paper from inside his boot.
‘Give us a bit, brother!’ he said, holding the paper out for Bao-yu to pour some in.
Bao-yu would have given him some, but Parfumee was unwilling that Etamine’s gift
to her should be shared.
‘No, don’t take any of that,’ she said. ‘I’ll get some more for you from outside.’
Bao-yu, divining the reason for her reluctance, quickly did the packet up again.
‘Here you are. Hurry up and get some more then.’
Parfumee took the packet, and having stored it safely away in the room where she
kept her things, looked in the drawer of her vanity-case for her own supply, only to
find that the box she had kept it in was empty - why she could not imagine, because
she was sure there had been some left in it that morning: But when she asked the
others, of course, no one knew anything about it.
‘There’s no time to bother about that now,’ said Musk. ‘Obviously it must have
been someone from this room. They must have found themselves short and
“borrowed” yours. Give him something else. It doesn’t matter what: he’ll never know
the difference. Anything to get rid of them, so that we can get on with our lunch!’
Following this advice, Parfumee made up a little packet of jasmine-scented
face-powder and took it inside to the boys. Jia Huan, grinning broadly, stretched out
his hand to receive it, but she threw it contemptuously on the kang and he had to
stoop down to pick it up. When he had stowed it inside the breast of his jacket, he
and Jia Cong finally took their leave.
With Jia Zheng permanently away and Lady Wang and the other ladles now also
absent, Jia Huan had lately taken to staying away from school for several days at a
time on the pretext that he was ill; he therefore felt no compunction in entering his
mother’s courtyard during the daytime. He did so now, very pleased with himself, to
look for Sunset, whom he found chatting with Aunt Zhao.
‘Look, I’ve brought you something nice,’ he said, going up to her, all smiles, and
holding out the packet: ‘something for your face. You know you’re always saying how
good rose?-orris is for skin troubles - how much better than the silver powder you
get from outside - well, have a look at this!’
Sunset opened the packet, took one look at its contents, and let out a hoot of
laughter.
‘Who did you get this from?’
Jia Huan told her.
‘They’ve been having you on,’ said Sunset. ‘This stuff isn’t rose-orris, it’s jasmine
face-powder.’
Jia Huan looked again. It did in fact have a slightly pinkish tinge, and when he sniffed
it, he found that it had a sweet, almost sickly perfume, quite unlike the clean, fresh
scent of the orris.
‘Well, anyway, it’s good stuff,’ he said. ‘Orris or this stuff; it’s all powder, isn’t it? You
can keep it to use on your face. This is still better than anything you could buy from
outside.’
Sunset put it away resignedly.
Aunt Zhao eyed her offspring scornfully.
‘You don’t think if they’d got anything really good they’d give it to you, do you? I’m
not surprised she made a fool of you; I’m surprised you bothered to ask her for it.
Take it back and throw it in her face, that’s what you ought to do. Now that the
others are all either chasing around the countryside after this funeral or lying with
their toes curled up in bed is just the moment for a good old row. Stir them all up a
bit. Pay them back for some of the things they’ve done to us in the past. No one’s
going to be bothered to dig a little thing like this up in two months’ time when
they’re all back again. And even if they do, you’ve got a good excuse. Bao-yu’s your
elder brother; you can’t do anything to offend him, I agree. But that doesn’t mean
that you have to put up with what every little cat or dog of his chooses to do to you.’
Jia Huan hung his head.
‘It’s not worth a quarrel,’ said Sunset, defending him. ‘Much better just grin and
bear it, whatever we think.’
‘Just stay out of this, will you?’ said Aunt Zhao. ‘It’s got nothing to do with you. He
knows he’s in the right. It’s a golden opportunity to go and tell these little hussies
exactly what he thinks of them.’ She pointed at Jia Huan scornfully. ‘Pah! Spineless
creature I If ever I say a word out of place or give you the wrong thing by mistake, I
get black looks from you soon enough! Oh yes, you can be very fierce with your own
mother! But when some little chit of a girl makes a fool of you, you take it lying down.
How can you expect the servants to respect you when you grow up if you always
behave like this? Oh, you’re so useless, you make me sick!’
Shamed and angered by her words, yet still not daring to act upon them) Jia Huan
made a dismissive gesture with his hand.
‘It’s all very well to talk, but you wouldn’t dare to go there any more than I would.
You want me to go back there and have a row with them, don’t you? All right,
suppose I do and they tell the school. I’m the one who’ll feel the pain when I get
beaten, not you. You’re always stirring me up to do things; then, when I get beaten
and sworn at, you just keep your head down and say nothing. This time you’re trying
to stir me up to have a row with these girls. Well, if you’re not afraid of Tan-chun,
why don’t you do it yourself? Then perhaps in future I might take a bit more notice of
what you said.’
His words touched Aunt Zhao on the raw.
‘What?’ she screamed. ‘Me afraid of my own flesh and blood, of my own daughter
that I once carried inside me? That’s a good story!’
She snatched up the packet of orris-powder from where Sunset had placed it and
went rushing off in the direction of the Garden. Sunset, having found expostulation in
vain, slipped off to another apartment to shelter from the storm. Jia Huan slunk off
through the ornamental gate to play on his own outside.
As Aunt Zhao, still in a highly combustible state, went charging into the Garden, who
should she run into but old Mamma Xia, that aunt of Swallow’s who was also the
foster-mother and implacable enemy of Nenuphar. From Aunt Zhao’s livid face and
bloodshot eyes it was evident to the old nannie that she was in a very nasty temper.
Mamma Xia politely inquired where she was going.
‘Now even the little painted actresses who haven’t been with us more than a few
days are discriminating against us. I could take it from anyone else, but to have little
creatures like that putting you in your place - it’s more than flesh and blood can
bear!’
As these sentiments, insofar as she could make sense of them, seemed very much in
accord with her own, Mamma Xia asked her, with some interest, precisely what it
was that had upset her. Aunt Zhao explained how Jia Huan had asked for rose-orris
and been fobbed off with ordinary face-powder.
‘My dear Mrs Zhao,’ said Mamma Xia, ‘have you only now begun to realize what
they are like? Why, what you have just told me is nothing I The other day they were
even burning ghost money in here - and Bao-yu sticking up for them, if you please I If
anyone else brings anything into the Garden, it’s all “unclean, unclean I” - there’s no
end of a fuss. But ghost money, than which there’s nothing more unclean that I know
of, that’s all right, apparently. You’re the most senior person after Her Ladyship, Mrs
Zhao. I think you ought to put your foot down for once. I’m sure if you did, everyone
would respect you for it. If you ask me, players is only trash anyway, so even if you
upset them, there’s nothing much they can do about it. Let these two things, the
powder and the ghost money, be your justification for making an example of them.
I’ll support you with my evidence. Give them a taste of your authority now and you
will find it that much easier to deal with other things later on. Even if the young
mistresses don’t like it, they’re not going to side against you with riff-raff like these.’
Aunt Zhao’s resolve was strengthened by this encouragement.
‘I didn’t know about the ghost money,’ she said. ‘Tell me what happened.’
Mamma Xia did so, in great detail, concluding with a further incitement to action.
‘Go and have it out with them, Mrs Zhao! We’ll stand by you if there’s any trouble.’
These words were as music in Aunt Zhao’s ears. Emboldened by them, she marched
off without more delay to Green Delights.
It chanced that Bao-yu was out when she arrived (he had heard that Dai-yu was
visiting All-spice Court and gone off to join her there) and Parfumee was having lunch
with Aroma and the other maids. The girls all rose to their feet as Aunt Zhao entered
and politely invited her to join them.
‘Won’t you have some lunch, Mrs Zhao? Why are you in such a hurry?’
Ignoring the invitation, Aunt Zhao stepped forward, threw the powder she was
carrying in Parfumee’s face and, with stabbing index finger for emphasis, began
shouting at her abusively.
‘Little strumpet! You’re a bit of bought goods, that’s all you are. We paid down
money and bought you, so that you could be trained to sing for our entertainment.
Play-actors and prostitutes are the class of people you belong to; the lowest servant
in this household is still a few steps above you. So what makes you think you have
the right to go discriminating between one person and another? It’s no skin off your
nose if Bao-yu wants to give something of his away to somebody: what business have
you to try and stop him? I suppose you thought when you palmed that stuff off on
Huan that he wouldn’t know the difference. Well, let me tell you: Master Huan is
Bao-yu’s brother, whatever you may think of him, and that means he’s one of the
masters, and there’s no cause for you to look down on him.’
Parfumee, never one to take things quietly, set up a howl of tearful protest.
‘I gave that stuff to him because I hadn’t got any orris and I was afraid if I told him I
hadn’t got any he wouldn’t believe me. Anyway, it’s good powder. And suppose I
have been trained as an actress, I’ve never played outside for money. I’m a little girl,
not a trumpet or whatever it was you called me. And as for being “bought goods”,
well, it wasn’t you who bought me. And anyway, look who’s talking! I thought all of
us here were bought goods. I don’t know why you of all people would want to drag
that up.’
‘Stop that at once!’ said Aroma, shocked, and tried to pull her Out of the way. But
Aunt Zhao, in speechless fury, had already advanced on Parfumee and dealt her a
couple of resounding slaps on the head. Aroma expostulated.
‘She’s only a child, Mrs Zhao, you don’t want to put yourself on the same level.
Leave it to us to deal with her.’
Parfumee was not to he struck with impunity and reacted to the assault with a fine
display of histrionics, weeping, shout?ing and throwing herself about in all directions.
‘How dare you hit me, you horrible old woman! You should look at yourself in the
mirror! Go on, hit me again then, hit me again! I don’t want to go on living!’
Lowering her head, she drove it into Aunt Zhao’s midriff, continuing, as she butted
into leer, to repeat her challenge. Several of the servants shouted at her and
attempted to pull her off. Aroma would have done so too, but Sky-bright drew her to
one side and advised her against joining them.
‘Leave them to it, Aroma Y6u and I don’t want to get mixed up in this. It’s the law of
the jungle now: you hit me, I hit you. Heaven knows where it will end!’
The servants who had followed in Aunt Zhao’s wake, when they heard the rumpus
inside, gave thanks to the Lord Buddha that justice was at last being done. Among
them, the old women who bore grudges against the little actresses were particularly
gratified to hear that Parfumee was being beaten.
The news travelled quickly. Nenuphar and Etamine, who had found a quiet corner of
All-spice Court in which to be alone together, heard it when the two former ‘painted
faces’ of their troupe, Xiang-yun’s Althee and Bao-qin’s Cardamome, burst in on them
to enlist their support.
‘Come on, you two! If we let them bully Parfumee, we shall all of us suffer. It’s time
to come out in the open and make a stand. Let’s show them a bit of spirit!’
The four of them were only children, full of righteous indig?nation for their friend.
Without a moment’s reflection they rushed off in a body and went charging into
Green Delights. Cardamome made first impact, and Aunt Zhao would have been
swept off her feet had she not been simultaneously ringed round by the three others,
who, with fists flailing, heads butting, and all emitting loud ‘boo-hoos’, pressed in
upon her rear and sides. Skybright and the senior maids, though pretending concern
and making half-hearted attempts to intervene, found it difficult not to laugh; but
Aroma was genuinely distressed and dashed from one to another of them, dragging
them away from Aunt Zhao. It was useless. As she pulled one off, another would dart
in to replace her.
‘What’s the matter with you all?’ wailed Aroma. ‘If you’ve got a grievance, why
can’t you discuss it like sensible human beings? You can’t go taking the law into your
own hands like this. I never heard of such a thing!’
Aunt Zhao could only curse helplessly. Etamine and Nenuphar held her firmly by each
arm and Althee and Cardamome had her pinned between them with their heads.
‘Kill us!’ they kept shouting, ‘Kill us all four!’
Parfumee meanwhile lay stretched out corpselike on the ground, having cried herself
into a swoon.
The little actresses might have remained locked in their grapple with Aunt Zhao
indefinitely, but Skybright had already sent Swallow to bear word of what was
happening to Tan-chun, and You-shi, Li Wan and Tan-chun, together with Patience
and a number of female domestics, now arrived upon the scene and shouted to them
peremptorily to release her.
Aunt Thao was by now pop-eyed with anger and the veins stood out thickly on her
forehead. They asked her how she came to be in such a predicament, but her reply,
though long and voluble, was made almost incomprehensible by rage, and You-shi
and Li Wan, unable to make anything of it, contented themselves with shouting some
more at the act?resses. Tan-chun, though, merely sighed.
‘This isn’t really very serious. You are too easily angered, Aunt. As a matter of fact
there was something I wanted to discuss with you, but the maids didn’t seem to
know where you had got to. Now it appears that you were in here, work?ing yourself
into a rage. Do come with us now.’
You-shi and Li Wan smilingly confirmed the invitation.
‘Yes, Mrs Zhao. Come with us to the office and we can discuss things with you
there.’
Since she could scarcely object to being consulted, Aunt Zhao was constrained to go
along with them, but even as she went she continued muttering angrily to herself
until Tan?-chun cut her short:
‘These girls are here for our amusement,’ Tan-chun said. ‘They are like pets. You
can talk to them and play with them if you feel like it, or if you don’t, you can simply
ignore them. It’s the same when they are naughty. Just as, when your puppy-dog
bites you or your kitten scratches you, you can either ignore it or have it punished, so
with these girls. If they do something to offend you, you can either let it pass, or, if
you don’t feel able to, you can call in one of the stewardesses and have them
punished. There is absolutely no need to go rushing off in person, shouting and
hollering at them. It’s so undignified. And besides, it sets so bad an example. Look at
Aunt Zhou. She doesn’t seem to suffer any of this disrespect you complain of and she
isn’t always rushing off after people to have it out with them. If I were you, Aunt, I
should go back to your room now and try to calm down a bit. And don’t go listening
any more to those trouble-makers. There’s no reason why you should do other
people’s work for them; you get no thanks for it; they merely laugh at you for being
stupid. However angry you may feel now, try to be patient for a few days until Lady
Wang gets back and we’ll see what we can do to get all this sorted out then.’
This dressing-down was effective, insofar as it left Aunt Zhao without a word to say,
and she returned in silence to her room. As soon as she had gone, Tan-chun burst out
angrily to the others.
‘You’d think she’d know better at her age. Why can’t she do anything to make
people respect her? I mean, what a ridic?ulous thing to quarrel about! And what a
way to behave! She will listen to absolutely anything anyone tells her. She has
absolutely no judgement of her own. And those wretched old women take advantage
of the fact to use her as their cat’s-paw.’
The more Tan-chun thought about it, the angrier she became. She ended up by
ordering the women to make some inquiries and find out whose incitement it was
that had goaded Aunt Zhao into action. The women went off obediently to
investigate, but turned to each other with shrugs and smiles as they left the building.
‘Like looking for a needle on the ocean bed!’
And though they had Aunt Zhao’s women and all the women from the Garden up in
front of them for question?ing, not one of them would admit to knowing anything at
all about it, and they were obliged to report back to Tan?-chun that they had failed.
‘But we shall go on making inquiries, miss,’ they said. ‘If we find anything suspicious,
we shall report it to you.’
Tan-chun’s anger had by this time subsided and she would have let the matter drop;
but Artemisie, the little actress who had been assigned to her apartment, came to
her privately to tell her that she could identify the culprit.
‘It was Mamma Xia,’ she said. ‘She hates us and she is always trying to get us into
trouble. The other day she tried to get Nenuphar into trouble for burning
spirit-money, but Bao-yu had asked her to burn it, and when he owned up, Mamma
Xia hadn’t a leg to stand on. Today, when I was delivering those handkerchiefs for you,
I noticed her and Mrs Zhao twittering away for ever such a long time together and
when they saw me coming they moved out of the way to avoid me.’
It seemed highly probable that it was Mamma Xia who had done the inciting; but
these little actresses were all closely in league together, Tan-chun reflected, and all of
them were exceptionally mischievous: it would be too risky to act on the evidence of
what one of them had said. She thanked Artemisie for her information, but inwardly
decided to do nothing.
By an unlucky chance Mamma Xia had a granddaughter who worked in Tan-chun’s
apartment and did various little errands for the maids, with all of whom she was
popular. Her name was Cicada, but the maids all called her ‘Ciggy’. On this particular
occasion Tan-chun had gone back to the jobs room’ after lunch, leaving Ebony in
charge of her apartment. Ebony now asked Ciggy to go to the Garden gatehouse and
get one of the pages there to run out and buy her a sweet-cake. Ciggy objected that
she had just finished sweeping the courtyard and had a backache. She told Ebony to
ask some?one else.
‘There’s no one else I can ask,’ said Ebony. ‘I tell you what. If you’ll do this errand
for me now, I’ll give you a piece of good advice that you can pass on to your grandma
when you get there.’
And she proceeded to tell her about Artemisie’s denunciation.
‘Tell her to be on her guard.’
‘The little beast!’ said Ciggy, taking the money for the sweetcake. ‘She wants to join
in too, does she? Wait till I tell my gran!’
And off she went to the back gate of the Garden.
It was a slack time now in the kitchen and the women, Mamma Xia among them,
having for the time being finished with fetching and carrying; were sitting outside on
the steps and gossiping. Ciggy asked one of them to go out and buy a hot fried
sweetcake for her and then proceeded to give her grandmother an account,
interlarded with much bad language of her own, of what Ebony had told her about
Artemisie.
Mamma Xia, both angered and alarmed by what she heard, was all for going off
straight away, having it out with the little actress, and protesting her innocence to
Tan-chun; but Ciggy prevented her.
‘Don’t go, Gran! What can you say to them if you do go? How are you going to
explain how you got to know about it? Once they start asking questions, you’ll be in
the soup again. I’ve told you this to put you on your guard. You don’t have to do
anything about it.’
Just then Parfumee peered in the gateway of the kitchen courtyard and called across
to Mrs Liu, the cook, who was still banging about inside the kitchen.
‘Cookie, Master Bao says, for his vegetable dish this evening could he have
something cold and vinegary again, please, only not so oily as last time?’
‘Very good,’ Cook Liu stood in her doorway and called back cheerfully. ‘Why should
they send you about such a great, important matter? Come in and look around, if it’s
not too dirty for you.’
Parfumee had barely stepped into the courtyard when the woman to whom Ciggy
had entrusted the money arrived back carrying Ebony’s hot fritter on a saucer.
‘Oo, lovely hot fritter! Give us a taste!’ said Parfumee jokingly.
‘That has been ordered and paid for by someone else,’ said Ciggy primly, as she
took the saucer from the woman. ‘It is not for you.’
‘Do you fancy one, miss?’ Cook Liu asked Parfumee. ‘I’ve got one in here that I
bought for our Fivey you can have if you like. It hasn’t been touched yet, so it’s quite
clean.’
She brought the fried cake out on a saucer and handed it to Parfumee.
‘There you are. Now you wait there a moment and I’ll heat up a nice cup of tea for
you to go with it.’
She went inside again to rake the top off the fire and heat some tea up in a skillet.
But instead of waiting for her, Parfumee picked the fritter up from its saucer, went
over to Ciggy with it, and held it under her nose for her to inspect.
‘Look what’s that, then? Fritter. Who wants your mouldy fritter? I was only joking. I
wouldn’t eat yours if you went down on your bended knees and begged me to!’
She began to crumble it up between her fingers and throw the pieces to the birds.
‘Don’t worry, Mrs Liu!’ she called out in the direction of the kitchen. ‘I’ll buy two
catties of these for you presently.’
Ciggy glared at her in outrage.
‘Old Thunder up there must be blind not to strike you dead,’ she said bitterly.
‘Either that, or he must be angry with me for something. Still, I can’t compete with
you, can I! I haven’t got anyone to rush out and give me things, or trot around after
me like a self-adopted slave, or chip in with a good word for me when there’s an
argument.’
‘All right, young ladies, that’s enough!’ said the women on the steps. ‘Can’t you
even see each other without having words?’
The more discerning of them, sensing that a storm was brewing and not wanting to
get involved, had already begun slipping off elsewhere. But Ciggy had no stomach for
a fight and went off, muttering angrily to herself, without further argument.
When the women had all gone, Cook Liu came bustling Out of her kitchen for a
private word with Parfumee.
‘That business we were talking about the other day -have you spoken to him about
it yet?’
‘Yes, I have,’ said Parfumee. ‘I was going to remind him of it today, but that
wretched Zhao woman came along and upset everything with her quarrelling. How’s
Fivey? Did she drink any of that Essence of Roses I brought her the other day?’
‘She drank it all,’ said Cook Liu. ‘She loved it. She’d really like some more, to tell the
truth, but she doesn’t like to ask.’
‘That’s all right,’ said Parfumee. ‘I can easily get her some more. I only have to ask
for it.’
The object of Parfumee’s inquiry, who owed her strange name to the fact that she
was the fifth of Old Liu’s granddaughters, though only the daughter of a cook, was in
both looks and intelligence a match for any of the senior maids -Patience, Aroma,
Faithful or Nightingale - and it was only because of a weakly constitution that she
was still, in her sixteenth year, without employment. Recently, however, observing
how numerous the maids were in Bao-yu’s apartment and how light their duties
were, and hearing that it was his intention to give them their freedom when they had
finished service with him, her mother had conceived the ambition of getting her on
the staff of Green Delights. Lack of a contact there had at first made this ambition
seem unrealizable; but Cook Liu had previously worked at Pear Tree Court, where her
cheerful and ungrudging service had won her golden opinions with the girls. They
greatly preferred her to their own foster-mothers. And so when Parfumee moved
into Green Delights, the cook had easily. prevailed on her to tackle Bao-yu on her
daughter’s behalf. Bao-yu had consented willingly, but the situation created by
Xi-feng’s illness together with other more recent developments had so far prevented
him from seeking higher approval for the appointment.
But we digress.
Bao-yu heard about the fracas created in his apartment by Aunt Zhao while he was at
All-spice Court visiting the girls. Though deeply distressed on Parfumee’s behalf, he
decided, after some hesitation, that intervention by him could only make matters
worse, and resolved to stay where he was. He did so until word reached All-spice
Court that Tan-chun had succeeded in getting Aunt Zhao out of the way. Returning
then, he had formally reproved Parfumee for her belligerency and then sent her on
an errand to the kitchen.
Parfumee now arrived back at Green Delights and reported on the fulfilment of her
mission. She also told him that, if he still had any, Fivey would like some more of the
Essence of Roses.
‘Yes, I think I’ve still got some,’ said Bao-yu. ‘Look, why don’t you give her all of it? I
don’t drink it very often myself.’
He sent Aroma to fetch it. As there was not a great deal of it left, he told Parfumee
that Fivey might as well keep the bottle. Parfumee went back to the kitchen again to
give the bottle to Cook Liu.
When she got there, she found Fivey there as well. To give her ailing, cooped-up
daughter a little treat, Cook Liu had brought her along with her that day when she
went to work. The girl had just been taking a little walk in the environs of her
mother’s kitchen and was now resting her feet in the kitchen and having a cup of tea.
Mother and daughter, when they saw the glittering five-inch crystal bottle half-full of
ruby liquid that Parfumee was carrying, assumed that it was some of Bao-yu’s West
Ocean grape wine that she was bring?ing them.
‘Sit yourself down,’ said Cook Liu. ‘I’ll just fetch the mulling-pan and boil up some
water to heat it in.’
Parfumee laughed.
‘That’s all there is, I’m afraid. He says you can keep the bottle.’
Fivey realized that the red liquid must be not grape wine but some more Essence of
Roses, and thanked her effusively for her kindness. Parfumee asked her how she felt.
‘A bit livelier today,’ said Fivey. ‘That’s why I came in with Mother. I’ve been for a
walk all around here, but there’s really not much to look at just a lot of rocks and the
backs of buildings. I haven’t seen anything that you could really call a view.’


‘Why don’t you go right inside?’ said Parfumee.
‘Because I won’t let her,’ her mother chipped in. ‘None of the young ladies in there
knows her. If some inquisitive person were to stop her and start asking questions,
she’d have a lot of trouble explaining what she was doing. Once you’ve got her a
place in there, as you so kindly promised, I’m sure there will be plenty willing to show
her around. She’ll be able to look around the Garden then until she’s sick of the sight
of it!’
‘You don’t want to worry,’ said Parfumee. ‘I’d look after her.’
‘I’m sure you would, bless you!’ said the cook. ‘But folks like us have to be more
careful.’
She poured Parfumee a cup of tea. Parfumee accepted her hospitality to the extent
of using some of this as a mouth?wash before getting up to go.
‘My hands are a bit full at the moment,’ said Cook Liu. ‘Fivey will see you out.’
The two girls went out together. Having first ascertained that there was no one else
about, Fivey impulsively took Parfumee by the hand:
‘Did you really ask him about that?’
‘Of Course I did!’ said Parfumee. ‘I wouldn’t deceive you. I’ve found out that there
are two vacancies that haven’t yet been filled: one of them is the place left by
Crimson, for whom Mrs Lian still hasn’t found him a substitute; the other one is
Trinket’s. If he asks for you, it will be only one out of those two places, so he will be
perfectly within his rights. The only reason he hasn’t done so already is because
Patience keeps telling Aroma that if we have any requests concerning either jobs or
allowances to make, we’d be well advised to put them off for the time being. The fact
is that Miss Tan is looking for someone to make an example of. She’s already made an
example of Mrs Lian by turning down two or three of her requests in a row, and now
she’s trying to pick on us. She hasn’t found an excuse for doing so yet, but she hasn’t
given up trying. So if we go asking her about a thing like this now, it’s almost a
foregone conclusion that she will say no; and once she’s turned it down, it will be
very difficult to get that refusal reversed. Much better wait until the situation here
has quietened down a bit - till Their Lady-ships are back again and everyone is in a
good mood. If he approaches the old girl then, she’ll give him anything he asks for, no
matter what it is.’
‘I know,’ said Fivey, ‘but I’m too impatient to wait that long. I want that job now. In
the first place it will make my mother happy. She’ll feel that all the trouble she has
had in bringing me up has not been wasted. Secondly, the pay I shall earn will make
things easier for them at home. And thirdly, if only I felt a bit more cheerful, as I shall
do if I get that job, I do believe that this illness of mine would get better - and that
would mean a great saving for my family on doctor’s fees and medicines.’
At that point Parfumee left her and continued on her way back alone. Fivey returned
to the kitchen. She and her mother spoke warmly together of Parfumee’s kindness.
‘I’d never have thought anything like this would ever come our way,’ said Cook Liu.
‘Still, though it’s so precious, you can have too much of a good thing. You don’t want
to overheat your blood. I think it would be rather a nice gesture if we were to pour a
little of this off to give to someone else.’
Fivey asked her who she had in mind.
‘I was thinking of taking half a cupful to your uncle’s boy,’ said Cook Liu. ‘He’s been
down with a fever this last day or two, and it’s just the sort of thing he would enjoy.’
Fivey made no reply and watched in silence while her rnother decanted a small
quantity of the red liquid into a teacup and then placed the bottle, after corking it up
again, on a shelf of the kitchen cupboard.
‘I think if I were you I wouldn’t give him that,’ she said finally. There was a wry little
smile on her face. ‘If anyone should ask you where it came from, we might find
ourselves in trouble.’
‘Oh, fiddlesticks!’ said her mother. ‘Surely we don’t have to be that careful? If you
work as hard as I do all the year round, you are entitled to a few perks. No one is
going to say that we stole it, surely?’
She sailed off cup in hand then to her brother’s, leaving Fivey alone in the kitchen.
She found her nephew in bed. He and his parents were all three delighted when they
learned what she had brought them. A cupful of cool water freshly drawn from the
well was mixed with a little of the essence and handed to the sick boy to drink. He
finished it at one draught and immediately declared that he felt better and that his
head seemed somewhat clearer. The cup containing the remainder of the essence
was covered with a square of paper and set on the table beside him.
While Cook Liu was still there, some of the sick boy’s workmates from the mansion
called in to visit him. Among them was a young fellow called Qian Huai, related on his
mother’s side to Aunt Zhao. His father worked in Accounts. Qian Huai’s own job was
to accompany Jia Huan when he went to school. A bachelor and with money to
spend, he had for long been an admirer of Fivey’s and in time past his parents had, at
his insistence, made several approaches to Fivey’s parents through intermediaries
asking for Fivey’s hand in marriage. Her parents were by no means averse to the
match, but as Fivey herself, though without actually saying anything, made it
perfectly plain by her behaviour that the idea was repugnant to her, they had not
dared to accept. More recently, with talk of Fivey going into service in the Garden,
they had been less inclined than ever to look on Qian Huai as a possible son-in-law,
for it now seemed probable that after four or five years’ service as a maid, Fivey
would be at liberty to marry someone of their own choice from outside. Qian Huai’s
parents, too, when they saw the way things stood, were inclined to let the matter
drop.
Not so Qian Huai, however. Wounded in his amour propre by Fivey’s rejection, he
made a fierce vow that he would pursue her relentlessly, with all the force and guile
at his command, until he had succeeded in making her his wife.
It was a surprise to him, needless to say, to call with the other pages on his sick
workmate and find Fivey’s mother at the bedside. Cook Liu was equally flustered on
recognizing Qian Huai among the little group of visitors and got up to go, on the
pretext of being busy.
‘Do just stay for a cup of tea,’ said her brother and sister-in-law. ‘It was so kind of
you to think of him.’
‘I expect they’ll he wanting their dinner inside now,’ said Cook Liu. ‘I’ll come and
see him again when I’m not so busy.’
The sister-in-law opened a drawer and took out a small paper packet from it as they
were leaving. Outside, at the corner by the gate, she pressed it, smilingly, into Cook
Liu’s hand.
‘This is something your brother brought back yesterday, from the gate. He was five
days on duty there and not a single tip all the time. Then suddenly yesterday some
high-up from Canton came here on a visit and left three little baskets of this white
stuff - “Lycoperdon Snow” it’s called - two for the masters and one for the people on
the gate. This here is your brother’s share of it. I opened it last night to have a look.
It’s beautiful stuff - so white and fine. They say that a little of it taken every morning
mixed with breast-milk is wonderful for building up the body. If you can’t get
breast-milk, you can use cow’s milk, or even plain boiled water. Of course, we
immediately thought of your Fivey; it would be just the thing for her. I sent our little
maid round with some this morning, but she said your door was locked. She said you
must have taken Fivey in with you. I would have gone in then to see her and given it
to her myself; but then I thought that with the mistresses away they’re much stricter
about letting people in and out now and they’d be sure to ask what business I had
going inside. And besides, this last day or two we’ve heard rumours of such terrible
goings-on in there, I should be afraid of getting mixed up in something. So it’s a good
job you came today, sister-in-law; you’ll be able to take the packet to her yourself.’
Cook Liu thanked her and left. At the corner gate of the Garden her way was blocked
by a grinning page.
‘Where have you been, missus? There have been two or three calls from inside
asking for you. Me and the others have been looking for you all over the place.
Where have you just come from? You don’t live out in this direction. I bet you’ve
been up to something!’
‘Cheeky little monkey!’ said the cook.
The rest of their exchange is recorded in the following chapter.